100th Sounding Rockets Content:100th Consecutively Successful Launch of Sounding Rocket RH-200
                                from TERLS
        


          Home
         
         / Activities /
         
          Missions accomplished
         












           Space activities in the country started during early 1960s with
                                    the
                                    scientific investigation of upper atmosphere and ionosphere over the geo magnetic
                                    equator that passes over Thumba near Thiruvananthapuram, using small sounding
                                    rockets.
                                    Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), Thiruvananthapuram has been pioneering the
                                    sounding
                                    rocket launch for scientific studies. Large numbers of sounding rockets have been
                                    developed and launched from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS). ISRO
                                    has
                                    developed a series of sounding rockets called Rohini series, important among them
                                    being
                                    RH-200, RH-300 and RH-560, number in the name indicating the diameter of the rocket
                                    in
                                    mm.
          








             1545 RH-200 rockets have been launched so far. Wednesday, July 15, 2015
                                            became a
                                            prestigious and memorable day in the history of sounding rocket programme of
                                            India
                                            as the RH-200 rocket had its 100th consecutively successful launch from
                                            TERLS. It
                                            demonstrated the high level of quality and reliability, which have been
                                            built into
                                            this tiny rocket.
            

             The rocket, having a diameter of 200 mm and length 3590 mm, weighs 108 kg
                                            and
                                            carries a 12 kg chaff payload. The payload gets ejected at an altitude of 70
                                            km and
                                            scientific information pertaining to wind and wind velocity will be obtained
                                            from
                                            70 km to 20 km. Balloon and surface MET sensors will provide data up to
                                            ground
                                            surface.
            







             More Details
            



             Launchers
            



             Sounding Rockets
            



               100th Consecutively Successful Launch of Sounding Rocket RH-200 from TERLS
              





             SLV
            



             ASLV
            



             PSLV
            



             GSLV
            



             GSLV Mk III
            



             SSLV
            



             RLV-TD
            




             Scramjet Engine - TD
            





           RH-200, during its flight, encounters severe environment peaks and is an ideal
                                    platform to assess new technologies, testing their airworthiness by exposing them to
                                    hostile environment. Many technologies like application of super capacitors for
                                    pyrotechnic initiation, micro centralised encoder, sequencer with solid state
                                    switches replacing costly electromechanical relays, programmable DC-DC converter,
                                    MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical System) based angular rate sensor, etc., have been
                                    tested for survivability and air worthiness in RH-200 rockets. The development and
                                    launch of sounding rockets was a prelude to the major launch vehicles of ISRO -
                                    PSLV, GSLV and GSLV MkIII.
          

           Many important campaigns have been taken up using RH-200 rockets. The most important
                                    programme was MONEX (Monsoon Experiment) under which over thousand rockets were
                                    launched. Equatorial Wave Studies (EWS) by Space Physics Laboratory had 51 launches
                                    of RH-200 rockets from SDSC SHAR. Another major programme was MIDAS (Dynamics Middle
                                    Atmosphere) by SPL, which had 180 launches of this rocket from TERLS Range.
          

           Some of the studies aimed at using rocket borne experiments and
                                    chaff payload over Thumba are:
          


            Middle atmospheric seasonal wind oscillations and its association with Indian summer
                                    monsoon
           

            Features and propagation of long period, medium period and short period equatorial
                                    wave modes
           

            Effects of long period waves on the background mean flow, gravity
                                    wave-tide-planetary wave interactions and their effects
           

            Middle atmospheric Climatology of Thumba
           

            Impact of monsoon circulations in stratospheric-tropospheric exchange process
           

            The influence of Middle atmospheric circulations on the onset, strength and
                                    withdrawal of monsoon
           

            Global analysis of the latitude-longitude variability of atmospheric oscillations
                                    (through interaction with external agencies)
           

            Middle atmospheric variations in connection with deep tropical convection and during
                                    the stages of tropospheric low-pressure systems
           

            Middle atmospheric variations during the polar Sudden Stratospheric Warming
           

            Possible tele-connections among Southern Oscillation / El Nino and the equatorial
                                    middle atmosphere
           

            Generation of gravity waves by tropospheric / stratospheric Jet streams
           

            Rocket triggered lightning programme
           

            Inter-annual variability of various atmospheric oscillations
           

            Diurnal and semi-diurnal tides derivation, Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO) and
                                    Stratospheric Semiannual Oscillation (SAO) effects on tides by progressive shifting
                                    of rocket launch
           

            Payload design and development for middle atmospheric data probing
           

            Statistical structure of wind component distribution for aerospace meteorological
                                    demands – re-entry / fragmentation analyses
           

            The effect of climate change in the middle atmospheric regime
           

            Dynamical effects on the seasonal variability of tropospheric-stratospheric minor
                                    constituents like ozone and water vapour in the middle atmospheric dynamics.
           



           Thousands of visitors along with the senior functionaries of VSSC witnessed this
                                    historic launch of RH-200. Director, VSSC highlighted the usefulness of sounding
                                    rockets for scientific studies.
          









           More Details
          



           Launchers
          



           Sounding Rockets
          



             100th Consecutively Successful Launch of Sounding Rocket RH-200 from TERLS
            





           SLV
          



           ASLV
          



           PSLV
          



           GSLV
          



           GSLV Mk III
          



           SSLV
          



           RLV-TD
          




           Scramjet Engine - TD