XpoSAT Content:X-ray Polarimeter Satellite (XPoSat)
Home /Activities/Science/X-ray Polarimeter Satellite (XPoSat)










                                    XPoSat (X-ray Polarimeter Satellite) is India’s first dedicated polarimetry mission
                                    to study various dynamics of bright astronomical X-ray sources in extreme
                                    conditions. The spacecraft will carry two scientific payloads in a low earth orbit.
                                    The primary payload POLIX (Polarimeter Instrument in X-rays) will measure the
                                    polarimetry parameters (degree and angle of polarization) in medium X-ray energy
                                    range of 8-30 keV photons of astronomical origin. The XSPECT (X-ray Spectroscopy and
                                    Timing) payload will give spectroscopic information in the energy range of 0.8-15
                                    keV.



                                

                                    The emission mechanism from various astronomical sources such as blackhole, neutron
                                    stars, active galactic nuclei, pulsar wind nebulae etc. originates from complex
                                    physical processes and are challenging to understand. While the spectroscopic and
                                    timing information by various space based observatories provide a wealth of
                                    information, the exact nature of the emission from such sources still poses deeper
                                    challenges to astronomers. The polarimetry measurements add two more dimension to
                                    our understanding, the degree of polarization and the angle of polarization and thus
                                    is an excellent diagnostic tool to understand the emission processes from
                                    astronomical sources. The polarimetric observations along with spectroscopic
                                    measurements are expected to break the degeneracy of various theoretical models of
                                    astronomical emission processes. This would be the major direction of research from
                                    XPoSat by Indian science community.


                                





                                       More Details
                                      



                                            PSLV-C58 / XPoSat Mission
                                        



                                        XPoSat 
                                      



                                       Launch Streaming
                                      



                                          Brochure
                                        


                                          PDF - 12.3 MB
                                        



                                            Gallery
                                        



                                          Teaser Video
                                        



                                            Liftoff and Onboard video
                                        



                                          XPoSat  First User Meet 2023 
                                        



                                          XPoSat Second User Meet 2023 
                                        



                                            Evolution of Instrumentation
                                        



                                          POLIX onboard XPoSat observations
                                        



                                          XSPECT payload performance
                                        





XPoSat payloads:
                                    
 POLIX

                                        POLIX is an X-ray Polarimeter for astronomical observations in the energy band
                                        of
                                        8-30 keV. The payload is being developed by Ramam Research Institute (RRI),
                                        Bangalore in collaboration with U R Rao Satellite Centre (URSC). The instrument
                                        is
                                        made of a collimator, a scatterer and four X-ray proportional counter detectors
                                        that
                                        surrounds the scatterer. The scatterer is made of low atomic mass material which
                                        causes anisotropic Thomson scattering of incoming polarised X-rays. The
                                        collimator
                                        restricts the field of view to 3 degree x 3 degree so as to have only one bright
                                        source in the field of view for most observations.


                                        POLIX is expected to observer about 40 bright astronomical sources of different
                                        categories during the planned lifetime of XPoSat mission of about 5 years. This
                                        is the first payload in the medium X-ray energy band dedicated for polarimetry
                                        measurements.

                                        

                                        
XSPECT
                                            XSPECT is an X-ray SPECtroscopy and Timing payload onboard XPoSat, which can
                                            provide fast timing and good spectroscopic resolution in soft X-rays. Taking
                                            advantage of the long duration observations required by POLIX to measure
                                            X-ray
                                            polarization, XSPECT can provide long-term monitoring of spectral state
                                            changes
                                            in continuum emission, changes in their line flux and profile, simultaneous
                                            long
                                            term temporal monitoring of soft X-ray emission in the X-ray energy range
                                            0.8-15
                                            keV. An array of Swept Charge Devices (SCDs) provide an effective area >30
                                            cm2
                                            at 6 keV with energy resolution better than 200 eV at 6 keV. Passive
                                            collimators
                                            are used to reduce the background by narrowing the field of view of XSPECT.
                                            XSPECT would observe several types of sources viz X-ray pulsars, blackhole
                                            binaries, low-magnetic field neutron star (NS) in LMXBs, AGNs and Magnetars.



                                        








                                   More Details
                                  



                                        PSLV-C58 / XPoSat Mission
                                    



                                    XPoSat 
                                  



                                    Launch Streaming
                                  



                                      Brochure
                                    


                                      PDF - 12.3 MB
                                    



                                        Gallery
                                    



                                      Teaser Video
                                    



                                        Liftoff and Onboard video
                                    



                                      XPoSat  First User Meet 2023 
                                    



                                      XPoSat Second User Meet 2023 
                                    



                                        Evolution of Instrumentation
                                    



                                      POLIX onboard XPoSat observations
                                    



                                      XSPECT payload performance