

SARAL Home / Activities / Missions accomplished

The Satellite with ARGOS and ALTIKA (SARAL) is a joint Indo-French satellite mission for oceanographic studies. SARAL performs altimetric measurements designed to study ocean circulation and sea surface elevation.

The payloads of SARAL are:

    Ka band Altimeter, ALTIKA- built by the French National Space Agency CNES. The payload is intended for oceanographic applications, operates at 35.75 Giga Hertz.
    ARGOS Data Collection System- built by the French National Space Agency CNES. ARGOS contributes to the development and operational implementation of the global ARGOS Data Collection System. It will collect a variety of data from ocean buoys to transmit the same to the ARGOS Ground Segment for subsequent processing and distribution.
    Solid State C-band Transponder (SCBT) is from ISRO and intended for ground RADAR calibration. It is a continuation of such support provided by C-Band Transponders flown in the earlier IRS-P3 and IRS-P5 missions.

The payloads of SARAL are accommodated in the Indian Mini Satellite-2 bus, which is built by ISRO.

More Details
PSLV-C20/SARAL
SARAL
Gallery
Brochure pdf icon PDF - 7.80 MB

SARAL Applications

SARAL data products will be useful for operational as well as research user communities in many fields like

    Marine meteorology and sea state forecasting
    Operational oceanography
    Seasonal forecasting
    Climate monitoring
    Ocean, earth system and climate research
    Continental ice studies
    Protection of biodiversity
    Management and protection of marine ecosystem
    Environmental monitoring
    Improvement of maritime security

प्रमोचन भार / Launch Mass: 407 kg
मिशन कालावधि / Mission Life : 5 years
शक्ति / Power: 906 W
प्रमोचक राकेट / Launch Vehicle: PSLV-C20/SARAL
उपग्रह का प्रकार / Type of Satellite: Earth Observation
निर्माता / Manufacturer: ISRO
स्‍वामी / Owner: ISRO
अनुप्रयोग / Application: Climate & Environment
Earth Observation
कक्षा का प्रकार / Orbit Type: SSPO (Sun Synchronous Polar Orbit)
Lift-off Mass 	407 kg
Orbit 	781 km polar Sun synchronous
Sensors 	4 PI sun sensors, magnetometer, star sensors and miniaturised gyro based Inertial Reference Unit
Orbit Inclination 	98.538 o
Local Time of Equator 	18:00 hours crossing
Power 	Solar Array generating 906 W and 46.8 Ampere-hour Lithium-ion battery
Onboard data storage 	32 Gb
Attitude and Orbit Control 	3-axis stabilisation with reaction wheels, Hydrazine Control System based thrusters
Mission Life 	5 years
Launch date 	Feb 25, 2013
Launch site 	SDSC SHAR Centre, Sriharikota, India
Launch vehicle 	PSLV - C20 