Scramjet Technology Content:ISRO’s Scramjet Engine Technology Demonstrator Successfully Flight
                                Tested
        


          Home
         
         / Activities /
         
          Missions accomplished
         








          Today, satellites are launched into orbit by
                                    multi-staged satellite launch vehicles that can be used only once
                                    (expendable). These launch vehicles carry oxidiser along with the fuel
                                    for combustion to produce thrust. Launch vehicles designed for one time
                                    use are expensive and their efficiency is low because they can carry
                                    only 2-4% of their lift-off mass to orbit. Thus, there is a worldwide
                                    effort to reduce the launch cost.
         

          Nearly 70% of the propellant (fuel-oxidiser
                                    combination) carried by today’s launch vehicles consists of oxidiser.
                                    Therefore, the next generation launch vehicles must use a propulsion
                                    system which can utilise the atmospheric oxygen during their flight
                                    through the atmosphere which will considerably reduce the total
                                    propellant required to place a satellite in orbit.
         

          Also, if those vehicles are made re-usable, the cost
                                    of launching satellites will further come down significantly. Thus, the
                                    future re-usable launch vehicle concept along with air-breathing
                                    propulsion is an exciting candidate offering routine access to space at
                                    far lower cost.
         

          Considering the strategic nature of air-breathing
                                    technology which has the potential to bring a significant shift in the
                                    launch vehicle design, worldwide efforts are on to develop the
                                    technology for air breathing engines. Ramjet, Scramjet and Dual Mode
                                    Ramjet (DMRJ) are the three concepts of air-breathing engines which are
                                    being developed by various space agencies.
         





            More Details
           



            Launchers
           



            Sounding Rockets
           




            SLV
           



            ASLV
           



            PSLV
           



            GSLV
           



            GSLV Mk III
           



            SSLV
           



            RLV-TD
           



            Scramjet Engine - TD
           



              Scramjet Engine - TD Gallery
             



              ISRO’s Scramjet Engine Technology Demonstrator Successfully Flight
                                                    Tested
             








         A ramjet is a form of air-breathing jet engine that
                                uses the vehicle’s forward motion to compress incoming air for
                                combustion without a rotating compressor. Fuel is injected in the
                                combustion chamber where it mixes with the hot compressed air and
                                ignites. A ramjet-powered vehicle requires an assisted take-off like a
                                rocket assist to accelerate it to a speed where it begins to produce
                                thrust.
        

         Ramjets work most efficiently at supersonic speeds
                                around Mach 3 (three times the speed of sound) and can operate up to
                                speeds of Mach 6. However, the ramjet efficiency starts to drop when the
                                vehicle reaches hypersonic speeds.
        






         A scramjet engine is an improvement over the ramjet
                                engine as it efficiently operates at hypersonic speeds and allows
                                supersonic combustion. Thus it is known as Supersonic Combustion Ramjet,
                                or Scramjet.
        






         A dual mode ramjet (DMRJ) is a type of jet engine
                                where a ramjet transforms into scramjet over Mach 4-8 range, which means
                                it can efficiently operate both in subsonic and supersonic combustor
                                modes.
        

         An important development in ISRO’s Air Breathing
                                Propulsion Project (ABPP) occurred on August 28, 2016, which was the
                                successful flight testing of its Scramjet.
        

         This first experimental mission of ISRO’s Scramjet
                                Engine towards the realisation of an Air Breathing Propulsion System was
                                successfully conducted from Satish Dhawan Space Centre SHAR,
                                Sriharikota.
        

         After a smooth countdown of 12 hours, the solid
                                rocket booster carrying the Scramjet Engines lifted off at 0600 hrs
                                (6:00 am) IST. The important flight events, namely, burn out of booster
                                rocket stage, ignition of second stage solid rocket, functioning of
                                Scramjet engines for 5 seconds followed by burn out of the second stage
                                took place exactly as planned.
        

         After a flight of about 300 seconds, the vehicle
                                touched down in the Bay of Bengal, approximately 320 km from
                                Sriharikota. The vehicle was successfully tracked during its flight from
                                the ground stations at Sriharikota.
        

         With this flight, critical technologies such as
                                ignition of air breathing engines at supersonic speed, holding the flame
                                at supersonic speed, air intake mechanism and fuel injection systems
                                have been successfully demonstrated. The Scramjet engine designed by
                                ISRO uses Hydrogen as fuel and the Oxygen from the atmospheric air as
                                the oxidiser. The August 28 test was the maiden short duration
                                experimental test of ISRO’s Scramjet engine with a hypersonic flight at
                                Mach 6. ISRO’s Advanced Technology Vehicle (ATV), which is an advanced
                                sounding rocket, was the solid rocket booster used for this recent test
                                of Scramjet engines at supersonic conditions. ATV carrying Scramjet
                                engines weighed 3277 kg at lift-off.
        






         ATV is a two stage spin stabilised launcher with
                                identical solid motors (based on Rohini RH560 sounding rocket) as the
                                first as well as the second stage (booster and sustainer). The twin
                                Scramjet engines were mounted on the back of the second stage. Once the
                                second stage reached the desired conditions for engine “Start-up”,
                                necessary actions were initiated to ignite the Scramjet engines and they
                                functioned for about 5 seconds. ATV flight operations were based on a
                                pre-programmed sequence.
        

         Some of the technological challenges handled by ISRO
                                during the development of Scramjet engine include the design and
                                development of Hypersonic engine air intake, the supersonic combustor,
                                development of materials withstanding very high temperatures,
                                computational tools to simulate hypersonic flow, ensuring performance
                                and operability of the engine across a wide range of flight speeds,
                                proper thermal management and ground testing of the engines.
        

         India is the fourth country to demonstrate the flight
                                testing of a Scramjet Engine.
        







           More Details
          



           Launchers
          



           Sounding Rockets
          




           SLV
          



           ASLV
          



           PSLV
          



           GSLV
          



           GSLV Mk III
          



           SSLV
          



           RLV-TD
          



           Scramjet Engine - TD
          



             Scramjet
                                                Engine - TD Gallery
            



             ISRO’s Scramjet Engine Technology Demonstrator Successfully Flight
                                                Tested