Sounding Rockets Content:Sounding Rockets
                            

 Home
                                
                                / Activities /
                                 Missions accomplished
                                












 Sounding rockets are one or two stage solid propellant rockets used
                                    for probing the upper atmospheric regions and for space research. They also serve as
                                    easily affordable platforms to test or prove prototypes of new components or
                                    subsystems intended for use in launch vehicles and satellites. With the
                                    establishment of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) in 1963 at
                                    Thumba, a location close to the magnetic equator, there was a quantum jump in the
                                    scope for aeronomy and atmospheric sciences in India. The launch of the first
                                    sounding rocket from Thumba near Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala on 21 November 1963,
                                    marked the beginning of the Indian Space Programme . Sounding rockets made it
                                    possible to probe the atmosphere in situ using rocket-borne instrumentation. The
                                    first rockets were two-stage rockets imported from Russia (M-100) and France
                                    (Centaure). While the M-100 could carry a payload of 70 kg to an altitude of 85 km,
                                    the Centaure was capable of reaching 150 km with a payload of approximately 30 kg.
                                




 More Details
                                        



                                            Launchers
                                        


 Sounding Rockets
                                        



                                                    100th Consecutively Successful Launch of Sounding Rocket RH-200 from
                                                    TERLS
                                                




 SLV
                                        


 ASLV
                                        


 PSLV
                                        


 GSLV
                                        


 GSLV
                                            Mk III
                                        


 SSLV
                                        


 RLV-TD
                                        


 Scramjet Engine - TD
                                        




 ISRO started launching indigenously made sounding rockets from 1965
                                    and experience gained was of immense value in the mastering of solid propellant
                                    technology. In 1975, all sounding rocket activities were consolidated under the
                                    Rohini Sounding Rocket (RSR) Programme. RH-75, with a diameter of 75mm was the first
                                    truly Indian sounding rocket, which was followed by RH-100 and RH-125 rockets. The
                                    sounding rocket programme was the bedrock on which the edifice of launch vehicle
                                    technology in ISRO could be built. It is possible to conduct coordinated campaigns
                                    by simultaneously launching sounding rockets from different locations. It is also
                                    possible to launch several sounding rockets in a single day.
                                
 Operational sounding Rockets
                                
 Currently, three versions are offered as operational sounding
                                    rockets , which cover a payload range of 8-100 Kg and an apogee range of 80-475 km.
                                





  Vehicle  
 RH-200 
 RH-300-Mk-II 
 RH-560-MK-II 


  Payload (in kg)  
 10 
 60 
 100 


  Altitude (in km)  
 80 
 160 
 470 


 Purpose
 Meterology
 Aeronomy
 Aeronomy


 Launch Pad 
 Thumba Balasore
 SDSC-SHAR
 SDSC-SHAR




 Several scientific missions with national and international
                                    participation have been conducted using the Rohini sounding rockets.
                                







 More Details
                                    



                                        Launchers
                                    


 Sounding Rockets
                                    



                                                100th Consecutively Successful Launch of Sounding Rocket RH-200 from
                                                TERLS
                                            




 SLV
                                    


 ASLV
                                    


 PSLV
                                    


 GSLV
                                    


 GSLV Mk
                                        III
                                    


 SSLV
                                    


 RLV-TD
                                    


 Scramjet Engine - TD