Science Payloads Onboard Chandrayaan-1 Mission
Chandrayaan-1 had five indigenously developed core payload/ experiments: TMC,
HySI, LLRI and HEX and a Moon Impact Probe (MIP) to impact on a predetermined
location on the lunar surface.
 Terrain Mapping stereo Camera (TMC) in the panchromatic band, having 5 m
spatial resolution and 20 km swath.
 Hyper Spectral Imaging camera (HySI) operating in 400-950 nm band with a
spectral resolution of 15 nm and spatial resolution of 80 m with a swath of 20
km.
 Lunar Laser Ranging Instrument (LLRI) with height resolution of less than 5 m
 High Energy X-ray spectrometer (HEX) using Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride
(CdZnTe) detector in the 30-270 keV energy region with spatial resolution of
33 km.
 Moon Impact Probe (MIP) as piggyback payload on the main orbiter of the
Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft, which will impact on the surface of the Moon.
Apart from the above indigenous payloads/experiments, ISRO solicited proposals
through an Announcement of Opportunity (AO) from International and Indian
Scientific Community for participating in the mission by providing suitable scientific
payloads, complementing the overall Chandrayaan-1 scientific objectives. Out of the
proposals received, six experiments were selected for inclusion in Chandrayaan-1
mission; two of the AO payloads, C1XS and SARA are developed by ESA jointly with
ISRO.
 Chandrayaan-1 X-ray Spectrometer (C1XS) through ESA - collaboration between
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK and ISRO Satellite Centre, ISRO. Part of this
payload is redesigned by ISRO to suit Chandrayaan-1 scientific objectives.
 Near Infra-Red spectrometer (SIR-2) from Max Plank Institute, Lindau, Germany
through ESA.
 Sub keV Atom Reflecting Analyser (SARA) through ESA, collaboration between
Swedish Institute of Space Physics, Sweden and Space Physics Laboratory,
Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, ISRO. The Data Processing Unit of this payload/
experiment is designed and developed by ISRO, while Swedish Institute of Space
Physics has developed the payload sensor.
 Radiation Dose Monitor Experiment (RADOM) from Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences.
 Miniature Synthetic Aperture Radar (Mini-SAR) from Applied Physics Laboratory,
Johns Hopkins University and Naval Air Warfare Centre, USA through NASA.
 Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) from Brown University and Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, USA through NASA.
Provided below is the summary of the prime objectives of the eleven payloads
carried onboard Chandrayaan-1 mission
Prime Objectives Payload
Search for water-ice MiniSAR, HEX, SARA
Chemical Mapping C1XS, HEX
Mineralogical Mapping HySI, SIR-2, M3
Topography Mapping LLRI,TMC
Radiation Environment RADOM, HEX, C1XS
Magnetic Field Mapping SARA
Volatile Transport HEX
Lunar Atmospheric constituent MIP
DETAILS OF INDIAN PAYLOADS
i. Terrain Mapping Camera (TMC)
Scientific Objective
The aim of TMC is to map topography of both near and far side of the Moon
and prepare a 3-dimensional atlas with high spatial and elevation resolution of 5 m.
Such high resolution mapping of complete lunar surface will help to understand the
evolution processes and allow detailed study of regions of scientific interests. The
digital elevation model available from TMC along with the Lunar Laser Ranging
Instrument (LLRI) on Chandrayaan-1 could improve upon the existing knowledge of
Lunar Topography.
Payload Configuration Details
The TMC will image in the panchromatic spectral region of 0.5 to 0.85 µm,
with a spatial/ ground resolution of 5 m and swath coverage of 20 km. The camera is
configured for imaging in the pushbroom mode, with three linear 4k element
detectors in the image plane for fore, nadir and aft views, along the ground track of
the satellite. The fore and aft view angles are ±25º respectively w.r.t. Nadir. TMC will
measure the solar radiation reflected / scattered from the Moon‟s surface. The
dynamic range of the reflected signal is quite large, represented by the two extreme
targets – fresh crust rocks and mature mare soil.
TMC uses Linear Active Pixel Sensor (APS) detector with in-built digitizer.
Single refractive optics will cover the total field of view for the three detectors. The
output of the detector will be in digitized form. The optics is designed as a single unit
catering to the wide field of view (FOV) requirement in the direction along the ground
track. The incident beams from the fore (+25) and aft (-25) directions are directed
on to the focusing optics, using mirrors. Modular camera electronics for each
detector is custom designed for the system requirements using FPGA / ASIC. The
expected data rate is of the order of 50 Mbps. The dimension of TMC payload is 370
mm x 220 mm x 414 mm and mass is 6.3 kg.
ii. Hyper Spectral Imager (HySI)
Scientific Objective
The main aim is to obtain spectroscopic data for mineralogical mapping of the
lunar surface. The data from this instrument will help in improving the available
information on mineral composition of the surface of Moon. Also, the study of data in
deep crater regions/central peaks, which represents lower crust or upper mantle
material, will help in understanding the mineralogical composition of Moon‟s interior.
Payload Configuration Details
The uniqueness of the HySI is in its capability of mapping the lunar surface in
64 contiguous bands in the VNIR, the spectral range of 0.4-0.95 µm region with a
spectral resolution of better than 15 nm and spatial resolution of 80 m, with swath
coverage of 20 km. HySI will collect the Sun‟s reflected light from the Moon‟s surface
through a tele-centric refractive optics and focus on to an APS area detector for this
purpose.
The dispersion is achieved by using a wedge filter so as to reduce the weight
and compactness of the system compared to using a prism / grating. The wedge
filter is an interference filter with varying thickness along one dimension so that the
transmitted spectral range varies in that direction. The wedge filter will be placed in
close proximity to an area detector. Thus, different pixels in a row of the detector will
be receiving irradiance from the same spectral region but different spatial regions in
the across track direction. In the column direction of the detector, different rows will
receive irradiance of different spectral as well as spatial regions in the along track
direction. The full spectrum of a target is obtained by acquiring image data in push
broom mode, as the satellite moves along the column direction of the detector. An
Active Pixel Sensor (APS) area array detector with built-in digitizer would map the
spectral bands. The payload mass is 2.5 kg and its size is 275 mm x 255 mm x 205
mm.
iii. Lunar Laser Ranging Instrument (LLRI)
The elevation map of the Moon prepared using the laser ranging instrument
carried onboard Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft will help in studying the morphology of
large basins and other lunar features, study stress, strain and flexural properties of
the lithosphere and when coupled with gravity studies, would be able to find the
density distribution of the crust.
Scientific Objective
To provide ranging data for determining the accurate altitude of the spacecraft
above the lunar surface, determine the global topographical field of the Moon,
determine an improved model for the lunar gravity field and supplement the terrain
mapping camera and hyper-spectral imager payloads.
Payload Configuration Details
LLRI works on the time-Of-Flight (TOF) principle. In this method, a coherent
pulse of light from a high power laser is directed towards the target whose range is to
be measured. A fraction of the light is scattered back in the direction of the laser
source where an optical receiver collects it and focuses it on to a photoelectric
detector. By accurately measuring the roundtrip travel time of the laser pulse, highly
accurate range/spot elevation measurements can be made.
LLRI consists of a 10 mJ Nd:YAG laser with 1064nm wave source operating
at 10 Hz pulse repetition mode. The reflected laser pulse from the lunar surface is
collected by a 200 mm Ritchey-Chrétien Optical receiver and focused on to a Silicon
Avalanche Photodetector. The output of the detector is amplified and threshold
detected for generating range information to an accuracy <5m.Four constant fraction
discriminators provide the slope information in addition to range information. The
different modes of operation of LLRI and the range computations from the detector
output are controlled and computed by a FPGA based electronics. The processed
outputs of LLRI will be used for generating high accuracy lunar topography. The
payload mass is 11.37 kg with base plate.
iv. High Energy X-ray Spectrometer (HEX)
The High-Energy X-ray spectrometer covers the hard X-ray region from 30
keV to 270 keV. This is the first experiment to carry out spectral studies of planetary
surface at hard X-ray energies using good energy resolution detectors.
The High Energy X-ray (HEX) experiment is designed primarily to study the
emission of low energy (30-270 keV) natural gamma-rays from the lunar surface due
to 238U and 232Th and their decay chain nuclides.
Scientific Objectives
The scientific goal of the HEX instrument is as follows:
 To identify excess 210Pb in lunar polar regions deposited there as a result
of transport of gaseous 222Rn, a decay product of 238U from other regions
of the Moon. This will enable us to understand transport of other volatiles
such as water to the polar regions.
 To detect other radioactive emissions, to characterise various lunar
terrains for their chemical and radioactive composition on the basis of
specific/integrated signal in the 30-270 keV region.
 To explore the possibility of identifying polar regions covered by thick
water-ice deposit from a study of the continuum background.
Payload Configuration Details
The geometric detector area of 144 cm2 is realized by nine Cadmium Zinc Telluride
(CZT) arrays, each 4 cm x 4 cm (5 mm thick), composed of 256 (16x16) pixels (size:
2.5 mm x 2.5 mm). Each CZT array is readout using two closely mounted Application
Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs), which provides self-triggering capability. The
detector will be biased at the cathode with –550 V and the electronic charge signals
are collected at the anode. A Cesium Iodide (CsI (Tl)) scintillator crystal coupled to
photomultiplier tubes (PMT), will be used as the anticoincidence system (ACS). The
ACS is used to reduce the detector background.
A specially designed collimator provides a field of view (FOV) of 33 km X 33 km at
the lunar surface from a 100 km orbit. The spatial resolution of HEX is 33 km and the
mass is 14.4 kg.
v. Moon Impact Probe (MIP)
The impact probe of 35 kg mass will be attached at the top deck of the main
orbiter and will be released during the final 100 km x 100 km orbit at a predetermined
time to impact at a pre-selected location. During the descent phase, it is spin-
stabilized. The total flying time from release to impact on Moon is around 25 minutes.
The primary objective is to demonstrate the technologies required for landing
the probe at a desired location on the Moon and to qualify some of the technologies
related to future soft landing missions.
Main Objectives
 Design, development and demonstration of technologies required for impacting
a probe at the desired location on the Moon.
 Qualify technologies required for future soft landing missions.
 Scientific exploration of the Moon from close range.
Payload Configuration Details
There will be three instruments on the Moon Impact Probe
 Radar Altimeter – for measurement of altitude of the Moon Impact Probe and
for qualifying technologies for future landing missions. The operating
frequency band is 4.3 GHz ± 100 MHz.
 Video Imaging System – for acquiring images of the surface of the Moon
during the descent at a close range. The video imaging system consists of
analog CCD camera.
 Mass Spectrometer – for measuring the constituents of tenuous lunar
atmosphere during descent. This instrument will be based on a state-of-the-
art, commercially available Quadrupole mass spectrometer with a mass
resolution of 0.5 amu and sensitivities to partial pressure of the order of 10-14
torr.
The dimension of the impact probe is 375 mm x 375 mm x 470 mm
MIP System configuration
The Moon Impact Probe (MIP) essentially consists of honeycomb structure,
which houses all the subsystems and instruments. In addition to the instruments, the
separation system, the de-boost spin and de-spin motors, it comprises of the
avionics system and thermal control system. The avionics system supports the
payloads and provides communication link between MIP and the main orbiter, from
separation to impact and provides a database useful for future soft landing.
The mission envisages collecting all the instrument data during descent and
transmits to main orbiter, which in turn will transmit them to the ground station during
visible phases.
Impact Probe Mission Profile
Pro
Orientation Separation, Spin Up &
Maneuver orbit
be
imaging
DETAILS OF ANNOUNCEMENT OF OPPORTUNITY PAYLOADS
i. Chandrayaan-1 X-ray Spectrometer (C1XS)
Scientific Objective
The primary goal of the C1XS instrument is to carry out high quality X-ray
spectroscopic mapping of the Moon, in order to constrain solutions to key questions
on the origin and evolution of the Moon. C1XS will use X-ray fluorescence
spectrometry (1.0-10 keV) to measure the elemental abundance, and map the
distribution, of the three main rock forming elements: Mg, Al and Si. During periods
of enhanced solar activity (solar flares) events, it may be possible to determine the
abundance of minor elements such as Ca, Ti and Fe on the surface of the Moon.
Background
When a primary X-ray beam strikes a sample, the X-rays can either be
absorbed or scattered by the atom. Upon absorption the X-ray, transfers all its
energy to an innermost electron. If the primary X-ray has sufficient energy, electrons
are ejected from the inner shells creating vacancies, causing an unstable condition
for the atom. As the atom returns to its stable condition, electrons from the outer
shells are transferred to the inner shells and in the process they radiate an X-ray
photon at a characteristic energy. Each element has a unique set of energy levels,
and produces X-rays at a unique set of energies, allowing it to be identified by
measurement and thereby to derive the elemental composition of a sample. The
process of emission of characteristic X-rays is called „X-ray Fluorescence‟ or XRF
and is widely used to measure the elemental composition of materials.
Solar X-rays excites fluorescent emission from the lunar surface. It is possible
to map the absolute elemental abundances of the main rock-forming elements on the
Moon by simultaneous measurement of this emission, and by monitoring of the
incident Solar X-ray flux. In addition, during bright flares, localized concentration
levels of key minor elements can also be detected.
Payload Configuration Details
The instrument utilises technologically innovative Swept Charge Device (SCD) X-ray
sensors, which are mounted behind low profile gold/copper collimators and
aluminium/polycarbonate thin film filters. The system has the virtue of providing
superior X-ray detection, spectroscopic and spatial measurement capabilities, while
also operating at near room temperature. A deployable proton shield protects the
SCDs during passages through the Earth‟s radiation belts, and from major particle
events in the lunar orbit. In order to record the incident solar X-ray flux at the Moon,
which is needed to derive absolute lunar elemental surface abundances, C1XS also
includes an X-ray Solar Monitor.
The X-ray Solar Monitor (XSM) is provided through collaboration between
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL) and University of Helsinki. With its wide field-
of-view of ± 52 degrees, XSM provides observation of the solar X-ray spectrum from
1-20 keV with good energy resolution (< 250 keV@5.9 keV) and fast spectral
sampling at 16 s intervals.
Throughout the normal solar conditions, C1XS will be able to detect
abundance of Mg, Al and Si in the lunar surface. During solar flare events, it may
additionally be possible to detect other elements such as Ca, Ti and Fe. The
onboard solar monitor acting in real time will greatly enhance the capability of C1XS
to determine absolute elemental abundances as well as their ratios. The total mass
of C1XS and XSM is 5.2 kg.
C1XS will be able to map the highland, mare regions, impact basins and large
craters on the Moon. The observation may be able to shed some light on the
existence and scale of pre-mare volcanism, help to refine estimates of the bulk
composition of the Moon and improve the evolutionary models.
Heritage: The primary C1XS instrument is based on the D-CIXS instrument on
the ESA SMART-1 mission, which is redesigned to suit Chandrayaan-1 scientific
objectives.
ii. Sub keV Atom Reflecting Analyser (SARA)
Scientific Objectives
SARA will image the Moon surface using low energy neutral atoms as
diagnostics in the energy range 10 eV - 3.2 keV to address the following scientific
objectives:
 Imaging the Moon‟s surface composition including the permanently
shadowed areas and volatile rich areas
 Imaging the solar wind-surface interaction
 Imaging the lunar surface magnetic anomalies
 Studies of space weathering
Background
The Moon does not possess a magnetosphere and atmosphere. Therefore,
the solar wind ions directly impinge on the lunar surface, resulting in sputtering and
backscattering. The kick-off and neutralized solar wind particles leave the surface
mostly as neutral atoms. The notable part of the atoms has energy exceeding the
escape energy and thus, such atoms propagate along ballistic trajectories. The
SARA instrument is designed to detect such atoms with sufficient angular and mass
resolution to address the above scientific objectives. SARA is the first-ever energetic
neutral atom imaging mass spectrometer.
Payload Configuration Details
The SARA instrument consists of neutral atom sensor CENA (Chandrayaan-1
Energetic Neutrals Analyzer), solar wind monitor SWIM and DPU (Data Processing
Unit). CENA and SWIM interface with DPU, which in turn interfaces with the
spacecraft. The masses of CENA, SWIM and DPU are 2 kg, 0.5 kg and 2 kg
respectively, totaling the SARA mass as 4.5 kg.
The functional blocks of CENA are shown below: Low-energy neutral atoms
enter through an electrostatic charged particle deflector (1), which sweeps away
ambient charged particles by a static electric field. The incoming low energy neutral
atoms are converted to positive ions on an ionization surface (2), and then passed
through an electrostatic analyzer of a specific (“wave”) shape that provides energy
analysis and effectively blocks photons (3). Particles finally enter the detection
section (4) where they are reflected at grazing incidence from a start surface towards
one of several stop micro channel plate (MCP) detectors. Secondary electrons
generated at the start surface and the stop pulses from the stop MCP detectors
preserve the direction and the velocity of the incident particle.
CENA main components
SWIM is an ion mass analyzer, optimized to provide monitoring of the
precipitating ions. Ions first enter the deflector, which provides selection on the
azimuth angle, following a cylindrical electrostatic analyzer. Exiting the analyzer the
ions are post-accelerated up to 1 keV and enter the time-of-flight cell, where their
velocity is determined by the same principle (surface reflection), as in the CENA
instrument.
iii. Near-IR Spectrometer (SIR-2)
Scientific Objectives
SIR-2 will address the surface-related aspects of lunar science in the following broad
categories:
 Analyse the lunar surface in various geological/mineralogical and
topographical units;
 Study the vertical variation in composition of crust;
 Investigate the process of basin, maria and crater formation on the Moon;
 Explore “Space Weathering” processes of the lunar surface;
 Survey mineral lunar resources for future landing sites and exploration.
Background
The determination of the chemical composition of a planet‟s crust and mantle
is one of the important goals of planetary research. Diagnostic absorption bands of
various minerals and ices, which are expected to be found on the surfaces of
planetary bodies, are located in the near-IR range, thus making near-infrared
measurements of rocks, particularly, suitable for identifying minerals.
Payload Configuration Details
SIR-2 is a grating NIR point spectrometer working in the 0.93-2.4 microns
wavelength range with 6 nm spectral resolution. It collects the Sun‟s light reflected by
the Moon with the help of a main and a secondary mirror.
This light is fed through an optical fiber to the instrument‟s sensor head, where it is
reflected off a dispersion grating. The dispersed light reaches a detector, which
consists of a row of photosensitive pixels that measure the intensity as a function of
wavelength and produces an electronic signal, which is read out and processed by
the experiment‟s electronics.
The mass of the instrument is 3.3 kg and the instrument unit dimension is 260 mm x
171 mm x 143 mm.
iv. Radiation Dose Monitor Experiment (RADOM)
Scientific Objectives
RADOM will qualitatively and quantitatively characterize the radiation
environment in near lunar space, in terms of particle flux, dose rate and deposited
energy spectrum. The specific objectives are
 Measure the particle flux, deposited energy spectrum, accumulated
radiation dose rates in Lunar orbit;
 Provide an estimate of the radiation dose around the Moon at different
altitudes and latitudes;
 Study the radiation hazards during the Moon exploration. Data obtained will
be used for the evaluation of the radiation environment and the radiation
shielding requirements of future manned Moon missions.
Background
The dominant radiation components outside the earth‟s magnetosphere are
the Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCR), modulated by the magnetic fields associated with
the low energy charged particles (the solar wind), which are continuously emitted
from the Sun and the Solar energetic Particle Events (SPE) emitted during solar
flares, sudden sporadic eruptions of the chromosphere of the Sun.
Radiation exposure of crewmembers on future manned space flight had been
recognised as an important factor for the planning and designing of such missions.
Indeed, the effects of ionising radiation on crew health, performance and life
expectancy are a limitation to the duration of man‟s sojourn in space. Predicting the
effects of radiation on humans during a long-duration space mission requires i)
accurate knowledge and modelling of the space radiation environment, ii) calculation
of primary and secondary particle transport through shielding materials and through
the human body, and iii) assessment of the biological effects of the dose.
The general purpose of RADOM is to study the radiation hazards during the
Moon exploration. Data obtained will be used for the evaluation of radiation
environment and radiation shielding requirements for future manned lunar missions.
Payload Configuration Details
RADOM is a miniature spectrometer-dosimeter containing one semiconductor
detector of 0.3 mm thickness, one charge-sensitive preamplifier and two micro
controllers. The detector weighs 139.8 mg. Pulse analysis technique is used for
obtaining the deposited energy spectrum, which is further converted to the deposited
dose and flux in the silicon detector. The exposure time for one spectrum is fixed at
30 s. The RADOM spectrometer will measure the spectrum of the deposited energy
from primary and secondary particles in 256 channels. RADOM mass is 160 g.
v. Miniature Synthetic Aperture Radar (Mini-SAR)
Scientific Objective
To detect water ice in the permanently shadowed regions on the Lunar poles, upto a
depth of a few meters.
Background
Although returned lunar samples show the Moon to be extremely dry, recent
research suggest that water-ice may exist in the polar regions. Because its axis of
rotation is perpendicular to the ecliptic plane, the poles of the Moon contain areas
that never receive light and are permanently dark. This results in the creation of “cold
traps”, zones that, because they are never illuminated by the sun, may be as cold as
50–70 K. Cometary debris and meteorites containing water-bearing minerals
constantly bombard the Moon. Most of this water is lost to space, but, if a water
molecule finds its way into a cold trap, it remains there forever – no physical process
is known that can remove it. Over geological time, significant quantities of water
could accumulate.
In 1994, the Clementine polar-orbiting spacecraft used its radio transmitter to
“illuminate” these dark, cold trap areas; echoes were recorded by the radio antennas
of the Earth-based Deep Space Network. Analysis of one series of data indicated
that at least some of the dark regions near the South Pole had reflections that
mimicked the radio-scattering behavior of ice. Subsequently, the orbiting Lunar
Prospector spacecraft found large quantities of hydrogen in the polar regions,
corresponding closely with large areas of permanent shadow, consistent with the
presence of water ice. The controversy over lunar polar ice continues to this day.
An onboard SAR at suitable incidence would allow viewing of all permanently
shadowed areas on the Moon, regardless of whether sunlight is available or the
angle is not satisfactory. The radar would observe these areas at incidence angle
near 45 degrees, recording echoes in both orthogonal senses of received
polarization, allowing ice to be optimally distinguished from dry lunar surface.
The Mini-SAR radar system can operate as an altimeter/scatterometer,
radiometer, and as a synthetic aperture radar imager.
Payload Configuration Details
The Mini-SAR system will transmit Right Circular Polarization (RCP) and
receive, both Left Circular polarization (LCP) and RCP. In scatterometer mode, the
system will measure the RCP and LCP response in the altimetry footprint, along the
nadir ground track. In radiometer mode, the system will measure the surface RF
emissivity, allowing determination of the near normal incidence Fresnel reflectivity.
Meter-scale surface roughness and circular polarization ratio (CPR) will also be
determined for this footprint. This allows the characterization of the radar and
physical properties of the lunar surface (e.g., dielectric constant, porosity) for a
network of points. When directed off nadir, the radar system will image a swath
parallel to the orbital track by delay/Doppler methods (SAR mode) in both RCP and
LCP.
The synthetic aperture radar system works at a frequency 2.38 GHz, with a
resolution of 75 m per pixel from 100km orbit and its mass is 8.77 kg.
vi. Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3)
M3 with high-resolution compositional maps will improve the understanding of
the early evolution of a differentiated planetary body and provide a high-resolution
assessment of lunar resources.
Scientific Objectives
The primary Science goal of M3 is to characterize and map lunar surface
mineralogy in the context of lunar geologic evolution. This translates into several
sub-topics relating to understanding the highland crust, basaltic volcanism, impact
craters, and potential volatiles.
The primary exploration goal is to assess and map lunar mineral resources at
high spatial resolution to support planning for future, targeted missions. These M3
goals translate directly into the following requirements:
 Accurate measurement of diagnostic absorption features of rocks and
minerals;
 High spectral resolution for deconvolution into mineral components;
 High spatial resolution for assessment geologic context and active processes;
M3 Measurements
M3 Optical Configuration
M3 measurements are obtained for 640 cross track spatial elements and 261
spectral elements. This translates to 70 m/pixel spatial resolution and 10 nm spectral
resolution (continuous) from a nominal 100 km polar orbit for Chandrayaan-1. The
M3 FOV is 40 km in order to allow contiguous orbit-to-orbit measurements at the
equator that will minimize lighting condition variations.
Payload Configuration Details
The M3 scientific instrument is a high throughput pushbroom imaging spectrometer,
operating in 0.7 to 3.0 m range. It measures solar reflected energy, using a two-
dimensional HgCdTe detector array.
Sampling : 10 nanometers
Spatial resolution: 70 m/pixel [from 100 km orbit]
Field of View: 40 km [from 100 km orbit]
Mass: 8.2 kg
The spectral range 0.7 to 2.6 m captures the absorption bands for the most
important lunar minerals. In addition, the spectral range 2.5 to 3.0 m is critical for
detection of possible volatiles near the lunar poles. The presence of small amounts
of OH or H O can be unambiguously identified from fundamental absorptions that
2
occur near 3000 nm.