•
ROCKET PROPULSION ELEMENTS
Rocket Propulsion Elements
Seventh Edition
GEORGE P. sunoN
Consultant
Formerly Laboratory Associate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
and formerly
Executive Director, Engineering
Rocketdyne, now The Boeing Company
OSCAR BIBLARZ
Professor
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Naval Postgraduate School
Wiley India Pvt. Ltd.
Rocket Propulsion Elements
Authorised reprint by Wiley India Pn. Ltd., 4435-36/7, Ansari Road, Daryaganj,
New Delhi-110002.
Cop)Tight © 2001 by John Wiley & Sons.
"All Rights Reserved. AUTHORIZED REPRINT OF THE EDITION PUBLISHED BY
JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., 605 Third Awnue, New York, NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-
6011. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without the written permission
of the publisher.
Limits of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Wiley India l\·t. Ltd., and the author
make no representation or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the
contents of this book, and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability
or fitness for any particular purpose. There are no warranties which extend beyond the
descriptions contained in this paragraph. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatiws or written sales materials. The accurary and completeness of the information
pro,·ided herein and the opinions stated herein are not guaranteed or warranted to produce
any particular results, and the advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for
ewry indiYidual. Neither John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Wiley India Pn. Ltd., nor author shall
be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks.
All brand names and product names used in this book are rrade names, sen·ice marks,
trademarks or registered trademarks of their respecti,·e owners. l11e Publisher is not associated
with any product or ,·endor mentioned in this book.
This edition is authorized for sale in the Indian Sub-<:ontinent only.
Reprinr: 2013
PrintcJ :If: Lalit Printer & Binder, Delhi
ISBN : 978-81-265-2577-5
CONTENTS
PREFACE xi
1 Classification 1
1.1. Duct Jet Propulsion / 2
1.2. Rocket Propulsion / 4
1.3. Applications of Rocket Propulsion / 15
References / 25
2 Definitions and Fundamentals 27
2.1. Definition / 27
2.2. Thrust / 32
2.3. Exhaust Velocity / 34
2.4. Energy and Efficiencies / 36
2.5. Typical Performance Values / 39
Problems / 41
Symbols / 43
References / 44
3 Nozzle Theory and Thermodynamic Relations 45
3.1. Ideal Rocket / 46
3.2. Summary of Thermodynamic Relations / 47
3.3. Isentropic Flow through Nozzles / 52
V
9
Vi CONTENTS
3.4. Nozzle Configurations / 75
3.5. Real Nozzles / 85
3.6. Four Performance Parameters / 92
3.7. Nozzle Alignment / 94
3.8. Variable Thrust / 96
Problems / 97
Symbols / 99
References / 100
4 Flight Performance 102
4. l. Gravity-Free Drag-Free Space Flight / 102
4.2. Forces Acting on a Vehicle in the Atmosphere / 106
4.3. Basic Relations of Motion / 108
4.4. Effect of Propulsion System on Vehicle Performance / 115
4.5. Space Flight / 117
4.6. Flight Maneuvers / 132
4.7. Flight Vehicles / 139
4.8. Military Missiles / 149
4.9. Aerodynamic Effect of Exhaust Plumes / 152
4.10. Flight Stability / l 53
Problems / 154
Symbols / 157
References / 159
5 Chemical Rocket Propellant Performance Analysis 160
5. l. Background and Fundamentals / 161
5.2. Analysis of Chamber or Motor Case Conditions / 169
5.3. Analysis of Nozzle Expansion Processes I 172
5.4. Computer Analysis / 179
5.5. Results of Thermochemical Calculations / 180
Problems / l 89
Symbols / 193
References / 195
6 Liquid Propellant Rocket Engine Fundamentals 197
6. l. Propellants / 20 l
6.2. Propellant Feed Systems / 203
6.3. Gas Pressure Feed Systems / 205
CONTENTS Vii
6.4. Propellant Tanks / 21 I
6.5. Tank Pressurization / 218
6.6. Turbopump Feed Systems and Engine Cycles / 221
6.7. Flow and Pressure Balance / 227
6.8. Rocket Engines for Maneuvering, Orbit Adjustments, or Attitude
Control / 228
6.9. Valves and Pipe Lines / 232
6.10. Engine Support Structure / 235
Problems / 236
Symbols / 238
References / 239
7 Liquid Propellants 241
7. I. Propellant Properties / 242
7.2. Liquid Oxidizers / 25 I
7.3. Liquid Fuels / 255
7.4. Liquid Monopropellants / 259
7.5. Gelled Propellants / 26 I
7.6. Gaseous Propellants / 263
7.7. Safety and Environmental Concerns / 264
Problems / 265
Symbols / 266
References / 266
8 Thrust Chambers 268
8. I. Injectors / 27 J
8.2. Combustion Chamber and Nozzle / 282
8.3. Heat Transfer Analysis / 308
8.4. Starting and Ignition / 320
8.5. Variable Thrust / 323
8.6. Sample Thrust Chamber Design Analysis / 324
Problems / 335
Symbols / 338
References / 340
9 Combustion of Liquid Propellants 342
9.1. Combustion Process / 343
9.2. Analysis and Simulation / 346
9.3. Combustion Instability / 348
viii CONTENTS
Problems / 360
References / 360
10 Turbopumps, Engine Design, Engine Controls, Calibration,
Integration, and Optimization 362
l 0.1. Turbopumps / 362
10.2. Performance of Complete or Multiple Rocket Propulsion
Systems / 384
10.3. Propellant Budget / 387
l 0.4. Engine Design / 389
10.5. Engine Controls / 396
l 0.6. Engine System Calibration / 405
10.7. System Integration and Engine Optimization / 411
Problems / 413
Symbols / 413
References / 415
11 Solid Propellant Rocket Fundamentals 417
I I.I. Propellant Burning Rate / 419
11.2. Basic Performance Relations / 437
l l.3. Propellant Grain and Grain Configuration / 444
11.4. Propellant Grain Stress and Strain / 453
11.5. Attitude Control and Side Maneuvers with Solid Propellant
Rocket Motors / 466
Problems / 467
Symbols / 470
References / 4 71
12 Solid Propellants 474
12.1. Classification / 474
12.2. Propellant Characteristics / 480
12.3. Hazards / 487
12.4. Propellant Ingredients / 494
12.5. Other Propellant Categories / 505
12.6. Liners, Insulators, and Inhibitors / 509
12.7. Propellant Processing and Manufacture / 511
Problems / 515
References / 518
CONTENTS ix
13 Combustion of Solid Propellants 520
13.1. Physical and Chemical Processes / 520
13.2. Ignition Process / 524
13.3. Extinction or Thrust Termination / 526
13.4. Combustion Instability / 528
Problems / 537
References / 537
14 Solid Rocket Components and Motor Design 540
14. l. Motor Case / 540
14.2. Nozzle / 550
14.3. Igniter Hardware / 563
14.4. Rocket Motor Design Approach / 568
Problems I 575
References / 577
15 Hybrid Propellant Rockets 579
15.1. Applications and Propellants / 580
15.2. Performance Analysis and Grain Configuration / 585
15.3. Design Example / 593
15.4. Combustion Instability / 599
Symbols / 604
References / 606
16 Thrust Vector Control 608
16.1. TVC Mechanisms with a Single Nozzle / 609
16.2. TVC with Multiple Thrust Chambers or Nozzles / 620
16.3. Testing / 621
16.4. Integration with Vehicle / 621
References / 623
17 Selection of Rocket Propulsion Systems 624
17. 1. Selection Process / 625
17 .2. Criteria for Selection / 630
17.3. Interfaces / 634
References / 638
X CONTENTS
18 Rocket Exhaust Plumes 639
18.1. Plume Appearance and Flow Behavior / 641
18.2. Plume Effects / 652
18.3. Analysis and Mathematical Simulation / 657
Problems / 658
References / 658
19 Electric Propulsion 660
19.1. Ideal Flight Perfonnance / 666
19.2. Electrothermal Thn:sters / 670
19.3. Non-Thermal Electric Thrusters / 677
19.4. Optimum Flight Performance / 696
19.5. Mission Applications / 700
19.6. Electric Space-Power Supplies and Power-Conditioning
Systems / 70 I
Problems / 706
Symbols / 707
References / 709
20 Rocket Testing 711
20.1. Types of Tests / 711
20.2. Test Facilities and Safeguards / 713
20.3. Instrumentation and Data Management / 720
20.4. Flight Testing / 724
20.5. Postaccident Procedures / 725
References / 726
Appendix 1 Conversion Factors and Constants 727
Appendix 2 Properties of the Earth's Standard Atmosphere 730
Appendix 3 Summary of Key Equations for Ideal Chemical
Rockets 731
Appendix 4 Derivation of Hybrid Fuel Regression Rate
Equation in Chapter 15 733
Appendix 5 Alternative Interpretations of Boundary Layer
Blowing Coefficient in Chapter 15 737
Index 739
PREFACE
This new edition concentrates on the subject of rocket propulsion, its basic
technology, performance, and design rationale. The intent is the same as in
previous editions, namely to provide an introduction to the subject, an under
standing of basic principles, a description of their key physical mechanisms or
designs, and an appreciation of the application of rocket propulsion to flying
vehicles.
The first five chapters in the book cover background and fundamentals.
They give a classification of the various propulsion systems with their key
applications, definitions, basic thermodynamics and nozzle theory, flight per
formance, and the thermochemistry of chemical propellants. The next nine
chapters are devoted to chemical propulsion, namely liquid rncket engines
and solid rocket motors. We devote almost half of the book to these two,
because almost all past, current, and planned future rocket-propelled vehicles
use them. Hybrid rocket propulsion, another form of using chemical combus
tion energy, has a separate chapter. The new longer chapter on electric propul
sion has been extensively revised, enlarged, and updated. Chapters 16-18 and
20 apply to all types of propulsion, namely thrust vector control, selection of a
rocket propulsion system for specific applications, testing of propulsion sys
tems, and behavior of chemical rocket exhaust plumes. Only a little space is
devoted to advanced new concepts, such as nuclear propulsion or solar thermal
propulsion, because they have not yet been fully developed, have not yet flown,
and may not have wide application.
The book attempts to strike a balance between theory. analysis, and prac
tical design or engineering tasks; between propulsion system and nonpropul
sion system subjects, which are related (such as testing, flight performance, or
xi
Xii PREFACE
exhaust plumes); and between rocket systems and their key components and
materials. There is an emphasis on up-to-date information on current propul
sion systems and the relation between the propulsion system, tr.e flight vehicle,
and the needs of the overall mission or flight objectives.
The new edition has more pages and extensive changes compared with the
sixth edition. We have expanded the scope, reorganized the existing subject
matter into a more useful form or logical sequence in some of the chapters, and
updated various data. About one-third of the book is new or extensively
revised text and figures. This new version has been heavily edited, upgraded,
and improved. Altogether we count about 2500 changes, additions, new or
rewritten sections or paragraphs, inserts, clarifications, new illustrations,
more data, enlarged tables, new equations, more specific terminology, or
new references. We have deleted the chapter on heat transfer that was in the
sixth edition, because we learned that it was not being used often and is some
what out of date. Instead we have added revised small specific sections on heat
transfer to several chapters. A new chapter on liquid propellant thrust cham
bers was added, because this component is the heart of liquid propellant rocket
engines.
Here are some of the topics that are new or completely revised. New sections
or subsections include engine structures, two-step nozzles, multiple nozzles, gas
properties of gas generator or preburner gases, classification of engine valves, a
promising new monopropellant, gaseous rocket propellants, propellant addi
tives, materials and fabrication of solid propellant motors, launch vehicles,
elliptical orbits, new sample design calculations, vortex instability in solid
rocket motors, design of turbopumps, design of liquid propellant engines,
insensitive munitions requirements, aerospike rocket engines, solid rocket
motor nozzles, and plume signatures. In addition there are new figures, for
example, the payload variation with orbit altitude or inclination angle, some
recently developed rocket propulsion systems, the design of shortened bell
shaped nozzle contours, and the expander engine cycle, and new tables, such
as different flight maneuvers versus the type of rocket propulsion system, list of
mission requirements, and the physical and chemical processes in rocket com
bustion. There are new paragraphs on rocket history, four additional nozzle
loss factors, use of venturi in feed systems, extendible nozzles, and water
hammer.
In the last couple of decades rocket propulsion has become a relatively
mature field. The development of the more common propulsion systems is
becoming routine and the cost of new ones is going down. For example,
much R&D was done on many different chemical propellants, but just a few
are used, each for specific applications. Although some investigations on new
propellants or new propellant ingredients are still under way, a new propellant
has not been introduced for a rocket production application in the last 25
years. Most of the new propulsion systems are uprated, improved, or modified
versions of existing proven units in the chemical propulsion and electrical
propulsion areas. There are only a few novel engines or motors, and some
PREFACE Xiii
are mentioned in this book. We have therefore placed emphasis on describing
several of the proven existing modern rocket propulsion systems and their
commonly used propellants, because they are the heritage on which new
ones will be based. It is not possible in any one book to mention all the
varieties, types, and designs of propulsion systems, their propellants, or mate
rials of construction, and we therefore selected some of the most commonly
used ones. And we discuss the process of uprating or modifying them, because
this is different from the design process for a truly new unit.
The number of countries that develop or produce rocket propulsion systems
has gone from three in 1945 to at least 35 today, a testimony to proliferation
and the rising interest in the subject. There are today more colleges that teach
rocket propulsion than before. Prior editions of this book have been translated
into three languages, Russian, Chinese, and more recently (1993) Japanese.
People outside of the U.S. have made some excellent contributions to the
rocket field and the authors regret that we can mention only a few in this book.
We have had an ongoing disparity about units. Today in U.S. propulsion
companies, most of the engineering and design and almost all the manufactur
ing is still being done in English engineering (EE) units (foot or inch, pounds,
seconds). Many of the technical papers presented by industry authors use EE
units. Papers from university authors, government researchers, and from a few
companies use the SI (International Standard- metric) units. If a customer
demands SI units, some companies will make new drawings or specifications
especially for this customer, but they retain copies with EE units for in-house
use. The planned transition to use exclusively SI units is complex and proceed
ing very slowly in U.S. industry. Therefore both sets of units are being used in
this revised edition with the aim of making the book comfortable for colleges
and professionals in foreign countries (where SI units are standard) and to
practicing engineers in the U.S. who are used in the EE system. Some tables
have both units, some sections have one or the other.
The use of computers has changed the way we do business in many fields.
We have developed computer programs for many an engineering analysis,
computer-aided design, computer-aided manufacturing, business and engineer
ing transactions, test data collection, data analysis or data presentation, project
management, and many others. In fact computers are used extensively in some
companies to design new propulsion devices. Therefore we identify in this book
the places where computer programs will be helpful and we mention this often.
However, we do not discuss specific programs, because they take up too much
space, become obsolete in a short time without regular upgrading, some do not
have a way to provide help to a user, and some of the better programs are
company proprietary and thus not available.
The first edition of this book was issued in 1949. With this new revised
seventh edition this is probably the longest active aerospace book (51 years)
that has been upgraded regularly and is still being actively used in industry and
universities. To the best of the authors' knowledge the book has been or is
being used as a college text in 45 universities worldwide. It is a real satisfaction
xiv PREFACE
to the authors that a very large number of students and engineers were intro
duced to this subject through one of the editions of this book.
The book has three major markets: it has been used and is still used as a
college text. It contains more material and more student problems than can be
given in a one-semester course. This then allows the choosing of selected por
tions of the book to fit the student's interest. A one-term course might consist
of a review of the first four or five chapters, followed by a careful study of
Chapters 6, I 0, 11, 14, and 19, a brief scanning of most of the other chapters,
and the detailed study of whatever additional chapter(s) might have appeal.
The book also has been used to indoctrinate engineers new to the propulsion
business and to serve as a reference to experienced engineers, who want to look
up some topic, data, or equation.
We have tried to make the book easier to use by providing (I) a much more
detailed table of contents, so the reader can find the chapter or section of
interest, (2) an expanded index, so specific key words can be located, and (3)
five appendices, namely a summary of key equations, a table of the properties
of the atmosphere, conversion factors and constants, and two derivations of
specific equations.
All rocket propellants are hazardous materials. The authors and the pub
lisher recommend that the reader do not work with them or handle them
without an exhaustive study of the hazards, the behavior, and the properties
of each propellant, and rigorous safety training, including becoming familiar
with protective equipment. Safety training is given routinely to employees by
organizations in this business. Neither the authors nor the publisher assume
any responsibility for actions on rocket propulsion taken by readers, either
directly or indirectly. The information presented in this book is insufficient
and inadequate for conducting rocket propulsion experiments or operations.
Professor Oscar Biblarz of the Naval Postgraduate School joins George P.
Sutton as a co-author in this edition. We both shared in the preparation of the
manuscript and the proofreading. Terry Boardman of Thiokol Propulsion (a
division of Cordant Technologies) join as a contributing author; he prepared
Chapter I 5 (hybrid rocket propulsion) and the major portion of the section on
rocket motor nozzles in Chapter 14.
We gratefully acknowledge the help and contributions we have received in
preparing this edition. Terrence H. Murphy and Mike Bradley of The Boeing
Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power, contributed new data and per
spective drawings to the chapters on rocket propulsion with liquid propellants.
Warren Frick of Orbital Sciences Corporation provided valuable data on satel
lite payloads for different orbits. David McGrath, Thomas Kirschner, and W.
Lloyd McMillan of Thiokol Propulsion (a division of Cordant Technologies,
Inc.) answered questions and furnished data on solid propellant rocket motors.
Carl Stechman of Kaiser-Marquardt furnished design information on a small
bi propellant thruster. Carl Pignoli and Pat Mills of Pratt & Whitney (a United
Technologies Company) gave us engine data and permission to copy data on
turbopumps and upper-stage space engines with extendible nozzle skirts.
PREFACE XV
Kathleen F. Hodge and Gary W. Joseph of the Space and Technology Division
of TRW, Inc., gave data on a pressurized storable propellant rocket engine and
a jet tab attitude control system. Oscar Biblarz acknowledges his colleagues
David W. Netzer, Brij N. Agrawal, and Sherif Michael who, together with
many students, have been an integal part of the research and educational
environment at the Naval Postgraduate School. Craig W. Clauss of Atlantic
Research Corporation (a unit of Sequa Corporation) helped with electric pro
pulsion.
George P. Sutton
Los Angeles, California
Oscar Biblarz
Monterey, Cal(fornia
COVER ILLUSTRATIONS
The color illustrations on the cover show several rocket propulsion systems,
each at a different scale. Below we briefly describe these illustrations and list
the page numbers, where more detail can be found.
The front cover shows the rocket nozzles at the aft end of the winged Space
Shuttle, shortly after takeoff. The two large strap-on solid rocket motors (see
page 545) have brightly glowing white billowy exhaust plumes. The three Space
Shuttle main engines (page 199) have essentially transparent plumes, but the
hot regions, immediately downstream of strong shock waves, are faintly visible.
The two darker-colored nozzles of the thrust chambers of the orbital maneu
vering system and the small dark nozzle exit areas (pointing upward) of three
of the thrusters of the reaction control system of the Space Shuttle (see page
208) are not firing during the ascent of the Shuttle.
The back cover shows (from top to bottom) small illustrations of (I) an
image of a stress/strain analysis model (see page 461) of a solid propellant
rocket motor grain and case, (2) a small storable bipropellant thruster of
about l 00 lbf thrust (page 307), (3) a three-quarter section of a solid propellant
rocket motor (page 9), and (4) an experimental aerospike rocket engine (page
298) during a static firing test.
CHAPTER 1
CLASSIFICATION
Propulsion in a broad sense is the act of changing the motion of a body.
Propulsion mechanisms provide a force that moves bodies that are initially
at rest, changes a velocity, or overcomes retarding forces when a body is
propelled through a medium. Jet propulsion is a means of locomotion whereby
a reaction force is imparted to a device by the momentum of ejected matter.
Rocket propulsion is a class of jet propulsion that produces thrust by ejecting
stored matter, called the propellant. Duct propulsion is a class of jet propulsion
and includes turbojets and ramjets; these engines are also commonly called air
breathing engines. Duct propulsion devices utilize mostly the surrounding
medium as the "working fluid", together with some stored fuel.
Combinations of rockets and duct propulsion devices are attractive for some
applications and are described in this chapter.
The energy source most useful to rocket propulsion is chemical combustion.
Energy can also be supplied by solar radiation and, in the past, also by
nuclear reaction. Accordingly, the various propulsion devices can be divided
into chemical propulsion, nuclear propulsion, and solar propulsion. Table 1-1
lists many of the important propulsion concepts according to their energy
source and type of propellant or working fluid. Radiation energy can origi
nate from sources other than the sun, and theoretically can cover the trans
mission of energy by microwave and laser beams, electromagnetic waves, and
electrons, protons, and other particle beams from a transmitter to a flying
receiver. Nuclear energy is associated with the transformations of atomic
particles within the nucleus of atoms and can be of several types, namely,
fission, fusion, and decay of radioactive species. Other energy sources, both
internal (in the vehicle) and external, can be considered. The energy form
1
2 CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 1-1. Energy Sources and Propellants for Various Propulsion Concepts
Energy Sourcea
Propellant or
Propulsion Device Chemical Nuclear Solar Working Fluid
Turbojet D/P TFD Fuel+ air
Turbo-ramjet TFD Fuel+ air
Ramjet (hydrocarbon fuel) D/P TFD Fuel+ air
Ramjet (H cooled) TFD Hydrogen + air
2
Rocket (chemical) D/P TFD Stored propellant
Ducted rocket TFD Stored solid fuel +
surrounding air
Electric rocket D/P TFD D/P Stored propellant
Nuclear fission rocket TFD Stored H
2
Nuclear fusion rocket TFND Stored H2
Solar heated rocket TFD Stored H
2
Photon rocket (big light TFND Photon ejection
bulb) (no stored propellant)
Solar sail TFD Photon reflection
(no stored propellant)
"D/P, developed and/or considered practical; TFD, technical feasibility has been demonstrated, but
development is incomplete; TFND, technical feasibility has not yet been demonstrated.
found in the output of a rocket is largely the kinetic energy of the ejected
matter; thus the rocket converts the input from the energy source into this
form. The ejected mass can be in a solid, liquid, or gaseous state. Often a
combination of two or more of these is ejected. At very high temperatures it
can also be a plasma, which is an electrically activated gas.
1.1. DUCT JET PROPULSION
This class, also called air-breathing engines, comprises devices which have a
duct to confine the flow of air. They use oxygen from the air to burn fuel stored
in the flight vehicle. The class includes turbojets, turbofans, ramjets, and pulse
jets. This class of propulsion is mentioned primarily to provide a comparison
with rocket propulsion and a background for combination rocket-duct
engines, which are mentioned later. Several textbooks, such as Refs. 1-1 and
1-2, contain a discussion of duct jet propulsion fundamentals. Table 1-2 com
pares several performance characteristics of specific chemical rockets with
those of typical turbojets and ramjets. A high specific impulse is directly related
to a long flight range and thus indicates the superior range capability of air
breather engines over chemical rockets at relatively low altitude. The unique
ness of the rocket, for example, high thrust to weight, high thrust to frontal
TABLE 1-2. Comparison of Several Characteristics of a Typical Chemical Rocket and Two Duct Propulsion Systems
Rocket Engine
Feature or Rocket Motor Turbojet Engine Ramjet Engine
Thrust-to-weight ratio, typical 75:1 5: 1, turbojet and afterburner 7:1 at Mach 3 at 30,000 ft
Specific fuel consumption 8-14 0.5-1.5 2.3-3.5
(pounds of propellant or fuel
per hour per pound of thrustt
Specific thrust (pounds of thrust 5000 to 25,000 2500 (Low Mach at sea level) 2700 (Mach 2 at sea level)
per square foot frontal areal
Thrust change with altitude Slight increase Decreases Decreases
Thrust vs. flight speed Nearly constant Increases with speed Increases with speed
Thrust vs. air temperature Constant Decreases with temperature Decreases with temperature
Flight speed vs. exhaust velocity Unrelated, flight speed can be Flight speed always less than Flight speed always less
greater exhaust velocity than exhaust velocity
Altitude limitation None; suited to space travel 14,000-17,000 m 20,000 m at Mach 3
30,000 m at Mach 5
45,000 m at Mach 12
Specific impulse typicalc 270 sec 1600 sec 1400 sec
(thrust force per unit propellant
or fuel weight flow per second)
aMultiply by 0.102 to convert to kg/hr-N.
bMultiply by 47.9 to convert to N/m2 .
c Specific impulse is a performance parameter and is defined in Chapter 2.
4 CLASSIFICATION
area, and thrust independence of altitude, enables extremely long flight ranges
to be obtained in rarefied air and in space.
The turbojet engine is the most common of ducted engines. Figure 1-1 shows
the basic elements.
At supersonic flight speeds above Mach 2, the ramjet engine (a pure duct
engine) becomes attractive for flight within the atmosphere. Thrust is produced
by increasing the momentum of the air as it passes through the ramjet, basi
cally as is accomplished in the turbojet and turbofan engines but without
compressors or turbines, Figure 1-2 shows the basic components of one type
of ramjet. Ramjets with subsonic combustion and hydrocarbon fuel have an
upper speed limit of approximately Mach 5; hydrogen fuel, with hydrogen
cooling, raises this to at least Mach 16. Ramjets depend on rocket boosters,
or some other method (such as being launched from an aircraft) for being
accelerated to near their design flight speed to become functional. The primary
applications have been in shipboard and ground-launched antiaircraft missiles.
Studies of a hydrogen-fueled ramjet for hypersonic aircraft look promising.
The supersonic flight vehicle is a combination of a ramjet-driven high-speed
airplane and a one- or two-stage rocket booster. It can travel at speeds up to a
Mach number of 25 at altitudes of up to 50,000 m.
1.2. ROCKET PROPULSION
Rocket propulsion systems can be classified according to the type of energy
source (chemical, nuclear, or solar), the basic function (booster stage, sustai
ner, attitude control, orbit station keeping, etc.), the type of vehicle (aircraft,
missile, assisted take-off, space vehicle, etc.), size, type of propellant, type of
construction, or number of rocket propulsion units used in a given vehicle.
Each is treated in more detail in subsequent chapters.
Another way is to classify by the method of producing thrust. A thermo
dynamic expansion of a gas is used in the majority of practical rocket propul
sion concepts. The internal energy of the gas is converted into the kinetic
energy of the exhaust flow and the thrust is produced by the gas pressure on
the surfaces exposed to the gas, as will be explained later. This same thermo-
Fuel injection....._-------
Compressor Combustion Turbine Afterburner
section section section and nozzle
-----------------section
FIGURE 1-1. Simplified schematic diagram of a turbojet engine.
1.2. ROCKET PROPULSION 5
Fuel
injection
-
< -E--
-
Air - -~~ ______ ..._<:__~ _____________ - --1
Combustion chamber Nozzle
section section
FIGURE 1-2. Simplified diagram of a ramjet with a supersonic inlet (converging and
diverging flow passage).
dynamic theory and the same generic equipment (nozzle) is used for jet propul
sion, rocket propulsion, nuclear propulsion, laser propulsion, solar-thermal
propulsion, and some types of electrical propulsion. Totally different methods
of producing thrust are used in other types of electric propulsion or by using a
pendulum in a gravity gradient. As described below, these electric systems use
magnetic and/or electric fields to accelerate electrically charged molecules or
atoms at very low densities. It is also possible to obtain a very small accelera
tion by taking advantage of the difference in gravitational attraction as a
function of altitude, but this method is not explained in this book.
The Chinese developed and used solid propellant in rocket missiles over 800
years ago and military bombardment rockets were used frequently in the eight
eenth and nineteenth centuries. However, the significant developments of
rocket propulsion took place in the twentieth century. Early pioneers included
the Russian Konstantin E. Ziolkowsky, who is credited with the fundamental
rocket flight equation and his 1903 proposals to build rocket vehicles. The
German Hermann Oberth developed a more detailed mathematical theory;
he proposed multistage vehicles for space flight and fuel-cooled thrust cham
bers. The American Robert H. Goddard is credited with the first flight using a
liquid propellant rocket engine in 1926. An early book on the subject was
written by the Viennese engineer Eugen Sanger. For rocket history see Refs.
1-3 to 1-7.
Chemical Rocket Propulsion
The energy from a high-pressure combustion reaction of propellant chemicals,
usually a fuel and an oxidizing chemical, permits the heating of reaction pro
duct gases to very high temperatures (2500 to 4100°C or 4500 to 7400°F).
These gases subsequently are expanded in a nozzle and accelerated to high
velocities (1800 to 4300 m/sec or 5900 to 14,100 ft/sec). Since these gas tem
peratures are about twice the melting point of steel, it is necessary to cool or
insulate all the surfaces that are exposed to the hot gases. According to the
physical state of the propellant, there are several different classes of chemical
rocket propulsion devices.
6 CLASSIFICATION
Liquid propellant rocket engines use liquid propellants that are fed under
pressure from tanks into a thrust chamber.* A typical pressure-fed liquid pro
pellant rocket engine system is schematically shown in Fig. 1-3. The liquid
bipropellant consists of a liquid oxidizer (e.g., liquid oxygen) and a liquid fuel
(e.g., kerosene). A monopropellant is a single liquid that contains both oxidizing
and fuel species; it decomposes into hot gas when properly catalyzed. A large
turbopump-fed liquid propellant rocket engine is shown in Fig. 1-4. Gas pres
sure feed systems are used mostly on low thrust, low total energy propulsion
systems, such as those used for attitude control of flying vehicles, often with
more than one thrust chamber per engine. Pump-fed liquid rocket systems are
used typically in applications with larger amounts of propellants and higher
thrusts, such as in space launch vehicles.
In the thrust chamber the propellants react to form hot gases, which in turn
are accelerated and ejected at a high velocity through a supersonic nozzle,
thereby imparting momentum to the vehicle. A nozzle has a converging sec
tion, a constriction or throat, and a conical or bell-shaped diverging section as
further described in the next two chapters.
Some liquid rocket engines permit repetitive operation and can be started
and shut off at will. If the thrust chamber is provided with adequate cooling
capacity, it is possible to run liquid rockets for periods exceeding I hour,
dependent only on the propellant supply. A liquid rocket propulsion system
requires several precision valves and a complex feed mechanism which includes
propellant pumps, turbines, or a propellant-pressurizing device, and a rela
tively intricate combustion or thrust chamber.
In solid propellant rocket motor/ the propellant to be burned is contained
within the combustion chamber or case. The solid propellant charge is called
the grain and it contains all the chemical elements for complete burning. Once
ignited, it usually burns smoothly at a predetermined rate on all the exposed
internal surfaces of the grain. Initial burning takes place at the internal surfaces
of the cylinder perforation and the four slots. The internal cavity grows as
propellant is burned and consumed. The resulting hot gas flows through the
supersonic nozzle to impart thrust. Once ignited, the motor combustion pro
ceeds in an orderly manner until essentially all the propellant has been con
sumed. There are no feed systems or valves (see Fig. 1-5).
Liquid and solid propellants, and the propulsion systems that use them, are
discussed in Chapters 6 to 10 and 11 to 14, respectively. Liquid and solid
propellant rocket propulsion systems are compared in Chapter 17.
*The term thrust chamber, used for the assembly of the injector, nozzle, and chamber, is preferred
by several official agencies and therefore has been used in this book. However, other terms, such as
thrust cylinder and combustor, are still used in the literature. For small spacecraft control rockets
the term thruster is commonly used and this term will be used in some sections of this book.
tHistorically the word engine is used for a liquid propellant rocket propulsion system and the word
motor is used for solid propellant rocket propulsion. They were developed originally by different
groups.
1.2. ROCKET PROPULSION 7
Check Check
valve valve
Tank Tank
vent vent
valve valve
High pressure
.:..:::~~+--,-
gas valve
(remote control)
Oxidizer Fuel
tank tank
pressure
gas
supply
tank
,============
Propellant valves
"
(remote control)
~~
\Ii\ ,_.1._1 1
\\ /J
Optional ,'-'-u-1
additional~ :
thrust : :
Rocket thrust chamber
chamber(s) : :
I I
I I
I I
\ ' I
' /
\I \
LI __ \ , j
FIGURE 1-3. Schematic flow diagram of a liquid propellant rocket engine with a gas
pressure feed system. The dashed lines show a second thrust chamber, but some engines
have more than a dozen thrust chambers supplied by the same feed system. Also shown
are components needed for start and stop, controlling tank pressure, filling propellants
and pressurizing gas, draining or flushing out remaining propellants, tank pressure relief
or venting, and several sensors.
Gaseous propellant rocket engines use a stored high-pressure gas, such as air,
nitrogen, or helium, as their working fluid or propellant. The stored gas
requires relatively heavy tanks. These cold gas engines have been used on
many early space vehicles as attitude control systems and some are still used
today. Heating the gas by electrical energy or by combustion of certain mono
propellants improves the performance and this has often been called warm gas
propellant rocket propulsion.
8 CLASSIFICATION
Pressurized Tank pressurization
helium valve
Exhaust
duct
Turbine
exhaust
nozzle
FIGURE 1-4. Simplified schematic diagram of one type of liquid propellant rocket
engine with a turbopump feed system and a separate gas generator, which generates
warm gas for driving the turbine. Not shown are components necessary for controlling
the operation, filling, venting, draining, or flushing out propellants, filters or sensors.
The turbopump assembly consists of two propellant pumps, a gear case, and a high
speed turbine.
Hybrid propellant rocket propulsion systems use both a liquid and a solid
propellant. For example, if a liquid oxidizing agent is injected into a combus
tion chamber filled with solid carbonaceous fuel grain, the chemical reaction
produces hot combustion gases (see Fig. 1~6). They are described further in
Chapter 15.
There are also chemical rocket propulsion combination systems that have
both solid and liquid propellants. One example is a pressurized liquid propel
lant system that uses a solid propellant to generate hot gases for tank pressur
ization; flexible diaphragms are necessary to separate the hot gas and the
reactive liquid propellant in the tank.
1.2. ROCKET PROPULSION 9
Nozzle throat
insert Nozzle exit cone
FIGURE 1-5. Simplified perspective three-quarter section of a typical solid propellant
rocket motor with the propellant grain bonded to the case and the insulation layer and
with a conical exhaust nozzle. The cylindrical case with its forward and aft hemispherical
domes form a pressure vessel to contain the combustion chamber pressure. Adapted
with permission from Reference 11-1.
Combinations of Ducted Jet Engines and Rocket Engines
The Tomahawk surface-to-surface missile uses two stages of propulsion in
sequence. The solid propellant rocket booster lifts the missile away from its
launch platform and is discarded after its operation. A small turbojet engine
sustains the low level flight at nearly constant speed toward the target.
A ducted rocket, sometimes ca.lied an air-augmented rocket, combines the
principles of rocket and ramjet engines; it gives higher performance (specific
impulse) than a chemical rocket engine, while operating within the earth's
atmosphere. Usually the term ai·r-augmented rocket denotes mixing of air
with the rocket exhaust (fuel-rich for afterburning) in proportions that enable
the pmopulsion device to retain the characteristics typifying a rocket engine, for
example, high static thrust and lni§h thrust-to-weight ratio. In contrast, the
ducted rncket often is .like a ramjet in that it must be boosted to operating
speed and uses the rocklet component:i; more as a fuel-rich gas generator (liquid,
solid, or hybrid), ignitelf~ and air ejecier pump.
The primciples of the irocket and ramjet can be combined so that the two
propulsion systems opera11ie in sequence and in tandem and yet utilize a com
mon combustion chamber volume as shown in Fig. 1-7. The low-volume con
figuration, known as an integral rocket-ramjet, can be attractive in air
launched missiles using ramjet propulsion (see Ref. 1-8). The transition from
the rocket to the ramjet requires enlarging the exhaust nozzle throat (usually by
ejecting rocket nozzle parts), opening the ramjet air inlet---combustion chamber
interface, and following these two events with the normal ramjet starting
sequence.
10 CLASSIFICATION
Liquid
oxidizer
injector
Valve
FIGURE 1-6. Simplified schematic diagram of a typical hybrid rocket engine. The
relative positions of the oxidizer tank, high pressure gas tank, and the fuel chamber
with its nozzle depend on the particular vehicle design.
A solid fuel ramjet uses a grain of solid fuel that gasifies or ablates and reacts
with air. Good combustion efficiencies have been achieved with a patented
boron-containing solid fuel fabricated into a grain similar to a solid propellant
and burning in a manner similar to a hybrid rocket propulsion system.
Nuclear Rocket Engines
Three different types of nuclear energy sources have been investigated for
delivering heat to a working fluid, usually liquid hydrogen, which subse
quently can be expanded in a nozzle and thus accelerated to high ejection
velocities (6000 to 10,000 m/sec). However, none can be considered fully
developed today and none have flown. They are the fission reactor, the
Solid rocket
propellant
Fuel manifold
Ejectable
rocket
nozzle
inserts
Ramjet
nozzle
FIGURE 1-7. Elements of an air-launched missile with integral rocket-ramjet propul
sion. After the solid propellant has been consumed in boosting the vehicle to flight
speed, the rocket combustion chamber becomes the ramjet combustion chamber with
air burning the ramjet liquid fuel.
1.2. ROCKET PROPULSION 11
radioactive isotope decay source, and the fusion reactor. All three types are
basically extensions of liquid propellant rocket engines. The heating of the
gas is accomplished by energy derived from transformations within the
nuclei of atoms. In chemical rockets the energy is obtained from within
the propellants, but in nuclear rockets the power source is usually separate
from the propellant.
In the nuclear fission reactor rocket, heat can be generated by the fission
of uranium in the solid reactor material and subsequently transferred to the
working fluid (see Refs. 1-9 to 1-11). The nuclear fission rocket is primarily
a high-thrust engine (above 40,000 N) with specific impulse values up to 900
sec. Fission rockets were designed and tested in the 1960s. Ground tests
with hydrogen as a working fluid culminated in a thrust of 980,000 N
(210,000 lb force) at a graphite core nuclear reactor level of 4100 MW
with an equivalent altitude-specific impulse of 848 sec and a hydrogen tem
perature of about 2500 K. There were concerns with the endurance of the
materials at the high temperature (above 2600 K) and intense radiations,
power level control, cooling a reactor after operation, moderating the high
energy neutrons, and designing lightweight radiation shields for a manned
space vehicle.
In recent years there have been renewed interest in nuclear fission rocket
propulsion primarily for a potential manned planetary exploration mission.
Studies have shown that the high specific impulse (estimated in some studies
at 1100 sec) allows shorter interplanetary trip transfer times, smaller vehicles,
and more flexibility in the launch time when planets are not in their optimum
relative position.
In the isotope decay engine a radioactive material gives off radiation, which
is readily converted into heat. Isotope decay sources have been used success
fully for generating electrical power in space vehicles and some have been
flown as a power supply for satellites and deep space probes. The released
energy can be used to raise the temperature of a propulsive working fluid
such as hydrogen or perhaps drive an electric propulsion system. It provides
usually a lower thrust and lower temperature than the other types of nuclear
rocket. As yet, isotope decay rocket engines have not been developed or
flown.
Fusion is the third nuclear method of creating nuclear energy that can heat
a working fluid. A number of different concepts have been studied. To date
none have been tested and many concepts are not yet feasible or practical.
Concerns about an accident with the inadvertent spreading of radioactive
materials in the earth environment and the high cost of development pro
grams have to date prevented a renewed experimental development of a large
nuclear rocket engine. Unless there are some new findings and a change in
world attitude, it is unlikely that a nuclear rocket engine will be developed or
flown in the next few decades, therefore no further discussion of it is given in
this book.
12 CLASSIFICATION
Electric Rocket Propulsion
In all electric propulsion the source of the electric power (nuclear, solar radia
tion receivers, or batteries) is physically separate from the mechanism that
produces the thrust. This type of propulsion has been handicapped by heavy
and inefficient power sources. The thrust usually is low, typically 0.005 to 1 N.
In order to allow a significant increase in the vehicle velocity, it is necessary to
apply the low thrust and thus a small acceleration for a long time (weeks or
months) (see Chapter 19 and Refs. 1-12 and 1-13).
Of the three basic types, electrothermal rocket propulsion most resembles
the previously mentioned chemical rocket units; propellant is heated electri
cally (by heated resistors or electric arcs) and the hot gas is then thermodyna
mically expanded and accelerated to supersonic velocity through an exhaust
nozzle (see Fig. 1-8). These electrothermal units typically have thrust ranges of
0.01 to 0.5 N, with exhaust velocities of 1000 to 5000 m/sec, and ammonium,
hydrogen, nitrogen, or hydrazine decomposition product gases have been used
as propellants.
The two other types-the electrostatic or ion propulsion engine and the
electromagnetic or magnetoplasma engine-accomplish propulsion by differ
ent principles and the thermodynamic expansion of gas in a nozzle, as such,
does not apply. Both will work only in a vacuum. In an ion rocket (see Fig.
1-9) a working fluid (typically, xenon) is ionized (by stripping off electrons)
and then the electrically charged heavy ions are accelerated to very high velo
cities (2000 to 60,000 m/sec) by means of electrostatic fields. The ions are
subsequently electrically neutralized; they are combined with electrons to pre
vent the buildup of a space charge on the vehicle.
In the magnetoplasma rocket an electrical plasma (an energized hot gas
containing ions, electrons, and neutral particles) is accelerated by the interac
tion between electric currents and magnetic fields and ejected at high velocity
Pressurized
propellant
gas
Arc between cathode
tip and annular
region of anode
Electric power
from low voltage
high current source
+~~~~~~~~~~~~~.....,.
FIGURE 1-8. Simplified schematic diagram of arc-heating electric rocket propulsion
system. The arc plasma temperature is very high (perhaps 15,000 K) and the anode,
cathode, and chamber will get hot (1000 K) due to heat transfer.
1.2. ROCKET PROPULSION 13
r
Ionization
device Ions are
Working fluid n_e_u_t_r_a_l_iz__e,.d.
(xenon) Electrostatic --------s--
,cr,l~ato,
Electric emitter
power
FIGURE 1-9. Simplified schematic diagram of a typical ion rocket, showing the
approximate distribution of the electric power.
(1000 to 50,000 m/sec). There are many different types and geometries. A
simple pulsed (not continuously operating) unit with a solid propellant is
shown in Fig. 1-10. This type has had a good flight record as a spacecraft
attitude control engine.
Other Rocket Propulsion Concepts
Several technologies exist for harnessing solar energy to provide the power for
spacecraft and also to propel spacecraft using electrical propulsion. Solar cells
generate electric power from the sun's radiation. They are well developed and
have been successful for several decades. Most electric propulsion systems have
used solar cells for their power supply.
-
_ Plasma exhaust from
_ parallel rail nozzle
Capacitor
FIGURE 1-10. Simplified diagram of a rail accelerator for self-induced magnetic accel
eration of a current-carrying plasma. When the capacitor is discharged, an arc is struck
at the left side of the rails. The high current in the plasma arc induces a magnetic field.
The action of the current and the magnetic field causes the plasma to be accelerated at
right angles to both the magnetic field and the current, namely in the direction of the
rails. Each time the arc is created a small amount of solid propellant (Teflon) is vapor
ized and converted to a small plasma cloud, which (when ejected) gives a small pulse of
thrust. Actual units can operate with many pulses per second.
14 CLASSIFICATION
An attractive concept, the solar thermal rocket, has large diameter optics to
concentrate the sun's radiation (e.g., by lightweight precise parabolic mirrors
or Fresnel lenses) onto a receiver or optical cavity. Figure 1-11 shows one
concept and some data is given in Table 2-1. The receiver is made of high
temperature metal (such as tungsten or rhenium) and has a cooling jacket or
heat exchanger. It heats a working fluid, usually liquid hydrogen, up to perhaps
2500°C and the hot gas is controlled by hot gas valves and exhausted through
one or more nozzles. The large mirror has to be pointed toward the sun and
this requires the mirror to be adjustable in its orientation. Performance can be
two to three times higher than that of a chemical rocket and thrust levels in
most studies are low (1 to 10 N). Since large lightweight optical elements
cannot withstand drag forces without deformation, the optical systems are
deployed outside the atmosphere. Contamination is negigible, but storage or
refueling of liquid hydrogen is a challenge. Problems being investigated include
rigid, lightweight mirror or lens structures, operational life, minimizing hydro
gen evaporation, and heat losses to other spacecraft components. To date the
solar thermal rocket has not yet provided the principal thrust of a flying space
craft.
The solar sail is another concept. It is basically a big photon reflector sur
face. The power source for the solar sail is the sun and it is external to the
vehicle (see Ref. 1-14). Approaches using nuclear explosions and pulsed
nuclear fusion have been analyzed (Refs. 1-15 and 1-16), but are not yet
feasible. Concepts for transmitting radiation energy (by lasers or microwaves)
from earth stations to satellites have been proposed, but are not yet developed.
Heat receiver
and exchanger
Parabolic
reflector
Radiation
from the
sun
Regulator
and valve
Exhaust
nozzle
FIGURE 1-11. Simplified schematic diagram of a solar thermal rocket concept.
1.3. APPLICATIONS OF ROCKET PROPULSION 15
International Rocket Propulsion Effort
Active development or production of rocket propulsion systems is currently
under way in more than 30 different countries. Some of them have made
significant and original contributions to the state of the art of the technologies.
There is mention in this book of a few foreign rocket units and their accom
plishments and references to international rocket literature. Although most of
the data in this book are taken from U.S. rocket experience, this is not intended
to minimize foreign achievements.
At the time of this writing the major international program was the
International Space Station (ISS), a multi-year cooperative effort with major
contributions from the USA and Russia and active participation by several
other nations. This manned orbital space station is used for conducting experi
ments and observations on a number of research projects.
1.3. APPLICATIONS OF ROCKET PROPULSION
Because the rocket can reach a performance unequaled by other prime movers,
it has its own fields of application and does not usually compete with other
propulsion devices. Examples of important applications are given below and
discussed further in Chapter 4.
Space Launch Vehicles
Between the first space launch in 1957 and the end of 1998 approximately 4102
space launch attempts have taken place in the world and all but about 129 were
successful (see Ref. 1- 17). Space launch vehicles or space boosters can be clas
sified broadly as expendable or recoverable/reusable. Other bases of classifica
tion are the type of propellant (storable or cryogenic liquid or solid
propellants), number of stages (single-stage, two-stage, etc.), size/mass of pay
loads or vehicles, and manned or unmanned. Figure 1-12 shows the Titan 111-
C space launch vehicle, one member of the Titan family of storable propellant
space launch vehicles, which is used extensively for boosting satellites into
synchronous earth orbit or into escape trajectories for planetary travel. This
heavy-duty launch vehicle consists of the basic 2-stage Titan III standard
launch vehicle (liquid propellant rockets) supplemented by two solid propellant
"strap-on motors." A fourth stage, known as the tratJstage, permits a wide
variety of maneuvers, orbit changes, and trajectory transfers to be accom
plished with the payload, which can be one or more satellites or spacecraft.
Each space launch vehicle has a specific space flight objective, such as an
earth orbit or a moon landing. It uses between two and five stages, each with its
own propulsion system, and each is usually fired sequentially after the lower
stage is expended. The number of stages depends on the specific space trajec
tory, the number and types of maneuvers, the energy content of a unit mass of
16 CLASSIFICATION
FIGURE 1-12. Titan III launch vehicle shortly after lift-off, with bright radiant exhaust
gas. Two solid propellant rocket motors, each providing about 2.4 million pounds of
thrust, boost the first stage, which also gets a sustained thrust of 470,000 pounds from
two liquid rocket engines. The second stage has 100,000 pounds of thrust from a single
liquid rocket engine, and one version of the third stage has two liquid rocket engines,
each at 16,000 pounds of thrust.
1.3. APPLICATIONS OF ROCKET PROPULSION 17
the propellant, and other factors. The initial stage, usually called the booster
stage, is the largest and it is operated first; this stage is then separated from the
ascending vehicle before the second-stage rocket propulsion system is ignited
and operated. As will be explained in Chapter 4, adding an extra stage permits
a significant increase in the payload (such as more scientific instruments or
more communications gear).
Each stage of a multistage launch vehicle is essentially a complete vehicle
in itself and carries its own propellant, its own rocket propulsion system or
systems, and its own control system. Once the propellant of a given stage is
expended, the dead mass of that stage (including empty tanks, cases, instru
ments, etc.) is no longer useful in providing additional kinetic energy to the
succeeding stages. By dropping off this useless mass it is possible to accel
erate the final stage with its useful payload to a higher terminal velocity
than would be attained if multiple staging were not used. Both solid pro
pellant and liquid propellant rocket propulsion systems have been used for
low earth orbits.
A single stage to orbit vehicle, attractive because it avoids the costs and
complexities of staging, is expected to have improved reliability (simple struc
tures, fewer components), and some versions may be recoverable and reusa
ble. However, its payload is relatively very small. A low earth orbit (say 100
miles altitude) can only be achieved with such a vehicle if the propellant
performance is very high and the structure is efficient and low in mass.
Liquid propellants such as liquid hydrogen with liquid oxygen are usually
chosen.
The missions and payloads for space launch vehicles are many, such as
military (reconnaissance satellites, command and control satellites), non-mili
tary government (weather observation satellites, GPS or geopositioning satel
lites), space exploration (space environment, planetary missions), or
commercial (communication satellites). Forecasts indicate that a large number
of future commercial communications satellites will be needed.
Table 1-3 lists several important U.S. launch vehicles and their capabilities
and Table 1-4 gives data on the Space Shuttle, which is really a combination of
launch vehicle, spacecraft, and a glider. It can be seen that the thrust levels are
highest for booster or first stages and are relatively high for upper stages
(thousands of pounds). Only for the attitude control system of the vehicle
(also called reaction control in Table 1-4) are the thrust levels low (from a
fraction of a pound for small spacecraft to as high as about I 000 pounds thrust
in the space shuttle vehicle). Frequent propulsion starts and stops are usually
required in these applications.
Spacecraft
Depending on their missions, spacecraft can be categorized as earth satellites,
lunar, interplanetary, and trans-solar types, and as manned and unmanned
spacecraft. Rocket propulsion is used for both primary propulsion (i.e.,
.....
ex, TABLE 1-3. Selected United States Space Launch Vehicles
Two-stage Three-stage
Payload Weight Payload Weight
Number of 100 n-mi (185 km) Geosynchronous
Engines Thrust Launch Orbit) Orbit
or Motors Mass
Name Stage per Stage kN ]bf Propellants (metric tons) kg ]bf kg ]bf
Titan 34D 1091 13,600 30,000 1820 4000
0 2 10,750 2,400,000 vac Solid composite
2 2370 529,000} N204/N2H4
2 452 101,000 + UDMH
3 107 23,800 Solid composite
Delta II 6925 132 2545 5600 1454 3200
0 6 + 443.5 Each 97,000 SL Solid composite
I 927 207,000 SL L0 2/RP-1
1037 231,700 vac
2 43.2 9645 N204/N2H4
-UDMH
67.6 15,100 vac Solid composite
Atlas Centaur 141 2772 6100 1545 3400
2 Each 829 SL Each 185,000 SL L0 2/RP-1
269 60,000 L0 /RP-1
2
2 2 Each 74 vac Each 16,500 vac L02/LH2
Pegasus 23.1 490 1078 NA NA
(air-launched) (Three stages)
726 163,000 Solid
2 196 44,200 Solid
3 36 8060 Solid
"SL" refers to sea level and "vac" refers to altitude or vacuum conditions.
TABLE 1-4. Propulsion Systems for the Space Shuttle
Number of
Propulsion Starts and Propellant
System Typical and Specific
Vehicle Section (No. of Units) Burn Time Impulse Thrust Mission
Shuttle orbiter Space Shuttle main Start at launch Liquid 1670 kN each Lift orbiter off ground
engine (3) 8.4 min duration hydrogen-liquid (375,000 lb) at sea and accelerate to
oxygen level orbit velocity.
Life: 55 starts and 4464 N-sec/kg 2100 kN each Individual engines can
7.5 hr (455 sec) (470,000 lbf) at be shut down to
space vacuum reduce thrust level.
Throttled I 09 to 65%
of rated power
Orbital maneuver 3 to IO starts/mission; See Note I; 27 kN each (6000 lbf) Insert orbiter vehicle
systems (2) designed for 1000 I,= 313 sec in vacuum into earth orbit,
starts, JOO flights, correct orbit, abort,
15 hours of and deorbit
cumulative time maneuver.
Reaction control system, Multiple operations; See Note I; I., = Primary thruster Small vehicle velocity
38 primary thrusters, thousands of starts; 280-304 sec, 3870 N each adjustments and
6 vernier thrusters duration from a few depending on (870 lbf), vernier attitude control
milliseconds to nozzle area thruster I 06.8 N during orbit
seconds ratio each (25 lbf) insertion, on orbit
corrections,
rendezvous, and
reentry.
Solid rocket boosters Attached to external Single start at launch See Note 2 14,700 kN each, or Boost Shuttle vehicle
(SRBs) tank; multisection, 2 min 3.3 x 106 !bf each to about 5500 km/hr
2 units
Separation rocket 4 each at forward Solid propellant; 97,840 N each or Move SRB away from
motors; 16 units frustum and aft I,= 250 sec 22,000 lbf vehicle after cut-off
skirt; 0.66 sec,
nominal
Notes:
.....
I. MMH, monomethylhydrazine and NTO, nitrogen tetroxide .
<O
2. 70% Ammonium perchlorate; 16% aluminum; 12% polybutadiene acrylic acid binder; 2% epoxy curing agent.
20 CLASSIFICATION
along the flight path, such as for orbit insertion or orbit change maneuvers)
and secondary propulsion functions in these vehicles. Some of the secondary
propulsion functions are attitude control, spin control, momentum wheel and
gyro unloading, stage separation, and the settling of liquids in tanks. A space
craft usually has a series of different rocket propulsion systems, some often
very small. For spacecraft attitude control about three perpendicular axes, each
in two rotational directions, the system must allow the application of pure
torque for six modes of angular freedom, thus requiring a minimum of 12
thrust chambers. Some missions require as few as four to six rocket units
whereas the more complex manned spacecraft have 40 to 80 rocket units in
all of its stages. Often the small attitude control rockets must give pulses or
short bursts of thrust, necessitating thousands of restarts.
Table 1-5 presents a variety of spacecraft along with their weights, missions,
and propulsion. Although only U.S. launch vehicles are listed in this table,
there are also launch vehicles developed by France, the European Space
Agency, Russia, Japan, China, India, and Israel that have successfully
launched payloads into satellite orbits. They use rocket propulsion systems
that were developed in their own countries.
The U.S. Space Shuttle program, using technology and experience from the
X-15 rocket-powered research airplane, the Mercury and Gemini orbital
flights, the Apollo lunar flight program, and Skylab, provided the first reusable
spacecraft that lands on a runway. Figure 1-13 shows the basic configuration
of the Space Shuttle, which consists of two stages, the booster and the orbiter.
It shows all the 67 rocket propulsion systems of the shuttle. The orbiter is really
a reusable combination vehicle, namely a spacecraft combined with a glider.
The two solid propellant rocket motors are the largest in existence; they are
equipped with parachutes for sea recovery of the burned-out motors. The large
liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen (L0 2/LH 2) external tank is jettisoned and
expended just before orbit insertion (see Ref. 1-18). Details of several of
these Space Shuttle rocket propulsion systems are given elsewhere in this
book. The Space Shuttle accomplishes both civilian and military missions of
placing satellites in orbit, undertaking scientific exploration, and repairing,
servicing, and retrieving satellites.
A reusable single stage to orbit, experimental vehicle with a novel rocket
engine is currently (1997) under development in the USA. It is a combination
launch vehicle and spacecraft. The design takes advantage of advances in light
weight structures, a clever lifting aerodynamic body concept, and a tailored
novel rocket engine that requires little space and fits well into the flight vehicle.
This engine, known as a linear aerospike, has a novel configuration and is
described further in Chapter 8.
The majority of spacecraft have used liquid propellant engines, with solid
propellant boosters. Several spacecraft have operated successfully with electri
cal propulsion for attitude control. Electrical propulsion systems will probably
also be used for some primary and secondary propulsion missions on long
duration space flights, as described in Chapter 19.
TABLE 1-5. Selected United States Spacecraft
Space Maneuver Propulsion
Weight
Name Thrust (!bf) Propellants" (]bf) Remarks
Mariner 69 50 (primary) Hydrazine monopropellant 1100 Flyby of Venus/Mercury
1.0 (secondary) Hydrazine monopropellant
Pioneer 10, 11 50 (primary) Hydrazine monopropellant 570 Fly to Jupiter and beyond
Viking 600 (primary) Hydrazine monopropellant 7500 Mars orbiter with soft lander
5.0 (secondary) Hydrazine monopropellant
Nimbus 5 0.5 (secondary) Stored nitrogen 1700 Weather satellite
Apollo command and service 20,500 (primary) N204/50:50 UDMH 64,500 Manned lunar landing
module I 00 !bf 16 units -N,H4
93 !bf 6 units (secondary) N204/MMH
Space Shuttle orbiter Two 6000-Jbf units (primary) N204/MMH 150,000 Reusable spacecraft with runway landing
38 units (a) 900 !bf (secondary) N204/MMH
Six 25-lbf units (secondary) N204/MMH
Fleet Communications Satellite O. l (secondary) Hydrazine monopropellant [854 UHF communications
Photo Recon 4.0 (secondary) Hydrazine monopropellant 25,000 Radio/photo communications
Intelsat V communication satellite 0.10 Hydrazine 4180 Resistojet, electric propulsion for N-S
station keeping
Deep Space I (OSI) 0.02 (primary) Xenon 1070 Ion propulsion engine for asteroid fly-by
"N204, nitrogen tetroxide (oxidizer); MMH, monomethylhydrazine (fuel); 50:50 UDMH-N2H4 is a 50% mixture of unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine and hydrazine.
...
N
Control thrusters.
8 required
per side Orbiting maneuver
engine, 2 places
Orbiter
Main propulsion
system, 3 engines
Tank/orbiter
Fwd attach
-,...------ ..,...------
Nozzle
\LH tank
2
FIGURE 1-13. Simplified sketch of the Space Shuttle vehicle. The Shuttle Orbiter-the delta-winged vehicle about the size of a medium
range jet liner-is a reusable, cargo carrying, spacecraft-airplane combination that takes off vertically and lands horizontally like a glider.
Each shuttle orbiter was designed for a minimum of 100 missions and can carry as much as 65,000 lb of payload to a low Earth orbit, and a
crew of up to four members and 10 passengers. It can return up to 25,000 lb of payload back to Earth.
TABLE 1-6. Selected United States Missiles
Mission Diameter Length Launch Weight
Category Name (ft) (ft) Propulsion (lb)
Surface-to- Minuteman III 6.2 59.8 3 stages, solid 78,000
surface (long Poseidon 6.2 34 2 stages, solid 65,000
range) Titan II IO 103 2 stages, liquid 330,000
Surface-to-air Chaparral 0.42 9.5 I stage, solid 185
( or to missile) Improved Hawk 1.2 16.5 I stage, solid 1398
Standard Missile I. I 3 15 or 27 2 stage, solid 1350/2996
Redeye 0.24 4 I stage, solid 18
Patriot 1.34 1.74 I stage, solid 1850
Air-to-surface Maverick 1.00 8.2 I stage, solid 475
Shrike 0.67 IO I stage, solid 400
SRAM 1.46 14 2 staged grains 2230
Air-to-air Falcon 0.6 6.5 I stage, solid 152
Phoenix 1.25 13 I stage, solid 980
Sidewinder 0.42 9.5 I stage, solid 191
Sparrow 0.67 12 I stage, solid 515
Antisubmarine Subroc 1.75 22 I stage, solid 4000
Battlefield Lance 1.8 20 2 stages, liquid 2424
Support Hellfire (antitank) 0.58 5.67 I stage, solid 95
(surface-to- Pershing II 3.3 34.5 2 stages, solid 10,000
surface, Tow (antitank) 0.58 3.84 I stage, solid 40
short range)
cruise missile Tomahawk 1.74 21 solid booster 3900
(subsonic) + turbofan
N
(.)
TABLE 1-7. Typical Propulsion Characteristics of Some Rocket Applications
Maximum
Application Type of Propellant Thrust Profile Typical Duration Acceleration"
Large space launch vehicle booster Solid or cryogenic liquid Nearly constant thrust 2-8 min 2-6g
0
Antiaircraft or antimissile-missile Solid, some with liquid terminal High thrust boost, 2-75 sec each 5 to 20 g 0, but
divert stage decreasing thrust sustain can be up to
phase IOOgo
Spacecraft orbit maneuvers Storable liquid or cryogenic Restartable Up to IO min 0.2-6go
liquid cumulative duration
Air launched guided missile Solid High thrust boost phase Boost: 2-5 sec Up to 25g
0
with low thrust or Sustain: 10-30 sec
decreasing thrust for
sustain phase; sometimes
2 pulses
Battlefield support--surface Solid Same as above Up to 2 min each stage Up to 10g
0
launched
Rocket assisted projectile, Solid Increase and then decrease A few sec Up to 20,000 go
gun launched in thrust
Spacecraft attitude control Storable liquid (monopropellant Many restarts (up to Up to I hr cumulative Less than 0.1 g
0
large vehicles or bipropellant); electric 60,000); pulsing duratiaon
propulsion; xenon
Spacecraft attitude control- Cold or warm gas or storable Same Up to 40 min cumulative Same
small vehicle liquid, electric propulsion
Reusable main engines for space Cryogenic liquid (02/H2) Variable thrust, many flights 8 min, over 7 hr cumulative
shuttle with same engine in several missions
Single stage to orbit (has not yet Cryogenic liquid (0 2/H2) Throttled to lower thrust 6-----10 min
flown)
Lunar landing Storable bipropellant I 0: I thrust variation 4 min Several go
Weather sounding rocket Solid Single burn period-often 5-50 sec Up to 15g
0
decreasing thrust
Antitank Solid Single burn period 0.2-3 sec Up to 20g
0
ag 0 is acceleration of gravity at the Earth's surface = 9.8066 m/sec2 or 32.17 ft/sec2
REFERENCES 25
Missiles and Other Applications
Military missiles can be classified as shown in Table 1-6. Rocket propulsion for
new U.S. missiles uses now almost exclusively solid propellant rocket motors.
They can be strategic missiles, such as long-range ballistic missiles (800 to 9000
km range) which are aimed at military targets within an enemy country, or
tactical missiles, which are intended to support or defend military ground
forces, aircraft, or navy ships.
The term surface launch can mean a launch from the ground, the ocean
surface (from a ship), or from underneath the sea (submarine launch). Some
tactical missiles, such as the air-to-surface SRAM missile, have a two-pulse
solid propellant motor, where two separate, insulated grains are in the same
motor case; the time interval before starting the second pulse can be timed to
control the flight path or speed profile. Most countries now have tactical
missiles in their military inventories, and many of these countries have a
capability to produce their own rocket propulsion systems that are used to
propel them.
Other applications of rockets include primary engines for research airplanes,
assist-take-off rockets for airplanes, ejection of crew escape capsules and
stores, personnel "propulsion belts,"and propulsion for target drones, weather
sounding rockets, signal rockets, decoy rockets, spin rockets, vernier rockets,
underwater rockets for torpedoes and missiles, the throwing of lifelines to
ships, and "Fourth of July" rockets.
Tables 1-6 and 1-7 show some parameters of rocket propulsion devices
for different applications. The selection of the best rocket propulsion system
type and design for any given application is a complex process involving
many factors, including system performance, reliability, propulsion system
size, and compatibility, as described in Chapter 17. Comparisons and eva
luations of many of these criteria are discussed in this book. Many factors,
such as development, production or operating costs, available technology,
and service life, though beyond the scope of this book, enter strongly into
such a selection.
REFERENCES
1-1. G. C. Oates, Aerothermodynamics of Gas Turbines and Rocket Propulsion,
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington, DC, Revised
1988, 452 pages.
1-2. H. Cohen, G. F. C. Rogers, and H. I. H. Saravanamuttoo, Gas Turbine Theory,
3rd ed., Longman Scientific and Technical, New York, 1987, 414 pages.
1-3. K. E. Ziolkowsky, Space Investigations by Means of Propulsive Spaceships (in
Russian), Kaluga, Saint Petersburg, 1914.
1-4. E. C. Goddard and G. E. Pendray. (Eds.), The Papers of Robert H. Goddard,
three volumes, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1970. It includes the treatise "A
26 CLASSIFICATION
Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes," originally published as Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 71, No. 2, 1919.
1-5. Hermann Oberth, Die Rakete zu den Planetenriiumen (By Rocket into Planetary
Space), R. Oldenburg, Munich, 1923.
1-6. E. Sanger, Raketenjlugtechnik (Rocket Flight Technology), R. Oldenburg,
Munich, 1933.
1-7. W. von Braun and F. Ordway, History of Rocketry and Space Travel, 3rd ed.,
Thomas Y. Crowell, New York, 1974.
1-8. F. F. Webster, "Integral Rocket/Ramjet Propulsion-Flight Data Correlation
and Analysis Technique," Journal of Spacecraft, Vol. 19, No. 4, July-August
1982.
1-9. R. W. Bussard and R. D. DeLauer, Nuclear Rocket Propulsion, McGraw-Hill
Book Company, New York, 1958.
1-10. "Nuclear Thermal Rockets; Next Step in Space" (collection of three articles),
Aerospace America, June 1989, pp. 16-29.
1-11. D. Buden, "Nuclear Rocket Safety," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 18, 30 Years of
Progress in Space, 1988, pp. 217-224.
1-12. R. C. Finke (Ed.), Electric Propulsion and its Application to Space Missions, Vol.
79, Progress in Aeronautics and Astronautics, American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, New York, 1981.
1-13. R. G. Jahn, Physics of Electric Propulsion, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 1968, 339 pages.
1-14. T. Svitek et al., "Solar Sails as Orbit Transfer Vehicle-Solar Sail Concept
Study-Phase II Report," A/AA Paper 83-1347, 1983.
1-15. V. P. Ageev et al., "Some Characteristics of the Laser Multi-pulse Explosive Type
Jet Thruster," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 8, No. 5-6, 1981, pp. 625-641.
1-16. R. A. Hyde, "A Laser Fusion Rocket for Interplanetary Propulsion," Preprint
UCRL 88857, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA,
September 1983
1-17. T. D. Thompson (Ed.), TRW Space Log, Vol. 32 to 34., TRW Space and
Electronics Group, TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, CA., 1996 and 1997-1998.
1-18. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, National Space Transportation
System Reference, Vol. I, Systems and Facilities, U.S. Government Printng
Office, Washington, DC, June 1988.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
Rocket propulsion is an exact but not a fundamental subject, and there are no
basic scientific laws of nature peculiar to propulsion. The basic principles are
essentially those of mechanics, thermodynamics, and chemistry.
Propulsion is achieved by applying a force to a vehicle, that is, accelerating
the vehicle or, alternatively, maintaining a given velocity against a resisting
force. This propulsive force is obtained by ejecting propellant at high velocity.
This chapter deals with the definitions and the basic relations of this propulsive
force, the exhaust velocity, and the efficiencies of creating and converting the
energy and other basic parameters. The symbols used in the equations are
defined at the end of the chapter. Wherever possible the American Standard
letter symbols for rocket propulsion (as given in Ref. 2-1) are used.
2.1. DEFINITIONS
The total impulse ! is the thrust force F (which can vary with time) integrated
1
over the burning time t.
(2-1)
For constant thrust and negligible start and stop transients this reduces to
(2-2)
27
28 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
1 is proportional to the total energy released by all the propellant in a propul
1
sion system.
The specific impulse Is is the total impulse per unit weight of propellant. It is
an important figure of merit of the performance of a rocket propulsion system,
similar in concept to the miles per gallon parameter used with automobiles. A
higher number means better performance. Values of I, are given in many
chapters of this book and the concept of an optimum specific impulse for a
particular mission is introduced later. If the total mass flow rate of propellant is
m and the standard acceleration of gravity at sealevel g is 9.8066 m/sec2 or
0
32.174 ft/sec2 , then
f~F dt
m (2-3)
Is= gof dt
This equation will give a time-averaged specific impulse value for any rocket
propulsion system, particularly where the thrust varies with time. During tran
sient conditions (during start or the thrust buildup period, the shutdown per
iod, or during a change of flow or thrust levels) values of Is can be obtained by
m
integration or by determining average values for F and for short time inter
vals. For constant thrust and propellant flow this equation can be simplified;
below, mp is the total effective propellant mass.
(2-4)
In Chapter 3 there is further discussion of the specific impulse. For constant
m,
propellant mass flow constant thrust F, and negligibly short start or stop
transients:
ls= F/(mgo) = F/w
(2-5)
! /(mpgo) = ltf w
1
The product mPg0 is the total effective propellant weight wand the weight flow
w.
rate is The concept of weight relates to the gravitational attraction at or near
sea level, but in space or outer satellite orbits, "weight" signifies the mass
multiplied by an arbitrary constant, namely g 0. In the Systeme International
(SI) or metric system of uni ts ls can be expressed simply in "seconds," because
of the use of the constant g 0. In the USA today we still use the English
Engineering (EE) system of units (foot, pound, second) in many of the chemi
cal propulsion engineering, manufacturing, and test operations. In many past
and current US publications, data and contracts, the specific impulse has units
of thrust (!bf) divided by weight flow rate of propellants (!bf/sec), simplified as
seconds. The numerical value of Is is the same in the EE and the SI system of
units. However, the units of Is do not represent a measure of elapsed time, but
a thrust force per unit "weight" -flow-rate. In this book the symbol I, is used for
2.1. DEFINITIONS 29
the specific impulse, as listed in Ref. 2-1. For solid propellant systems the
symbol /sp is sometimes used, as listed in Ref. 2-2.
In a rocket nozzle the actual exhaust velocity is not uniform over the entire
exit cross-section and does not represent the entire thrust magnitude. The
velocity profile is difficult to measure accurately. For convenience a uniform
axial velocity c is assumed which allows a one-dimensional description of the
problem. This effective exhaust velocity c is the average equivalent velocity at
which propellant is ejected from the vehicle. It is defined as
C = lsgO = F/m (2-6)
It is given either in meters per second or feet per second. Since c and Is differ
only by an arbitrary constant, either one can be used as a measure of rocket
performance. In the Russian literature c is generally used.
In solid propellant rockets it is difficult to measure the propellant flow rate
accurately. Therefore, the specific impulse is often calculated from total
impulse and the propellant weight (using the difference between initial and
final motor weights and Eq. 2-5). In turn the total impulse is obtained from
the integral of the measured thrust with time, using Eq. 2-1. In liquid propel
lant units it is possible to measure thrust and instantaneous propellant flow
rate and thus to use Eq. 2-3 for calculation of specific impulse. Eq. 2-4 allows
another definition for specific impulse, namely, the amount of impulse
imparted to a vehicle per unit sea-level weight of propellant expended.
The term specific propellant consumption refers to the reciprocal of the spe
cific impulse and is not commonly used in rocket propulsion. It is used in
automotive and duct propulsion systems. Typical values are listed in Table
1-2.
The mass ratio l\R of a vehicle or a particular vehicle stage is defined to be
the final mass m (after rocket operation has consumed all usable propellant)
1
divided by m (before rocket operation). The various terms are depicted in Fig.
0
4-1.
(2-7)
This applies to a single or a multi-stage vehicle; for the latter, the overall mass
ratio is the product of the individual vehicle stage mass ratios. The final mass
m is the mass of the vehicle after the rocket has ceased to operate when all the
1
useful propellant mass mp has been consumed and ejected. The final vehicle
mass m includes all those components that are not useful propellant and may
1
include guidance devices, navigation gear, payload (e.g., scientific instruments
or a military warhead), flight control systems, communication devices, power
supplies, tank structure, residual or unusable propellant, and all the propulsion
hardware. In some vehicles it can also include wings, fins, a crew, life support
systems, reentry shields, landing gears, etc. Typical values of l\R can range
from 60% for some tactical missiles to less than I 0% for some unmanned
30 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
launch vehicle stages. This mass ratio is an important parameter in analyzing
flight performance, as explained in Chapter 4. When 1\-R is applied to a single
stage, then its upper stages become the "payload."
The propellant mass fraction { indicates the fraction of propellant mass mp in
an initial mass m 0. It can be applied to a vehicle, a stage of a vehicle or to a
rocket propulsion system.
{=mp/mo (2-8)
{=(mo - m1)/m = mp/(mp + m1) (2-9)
0
m
0
= m1 +mp (2-10)
When applied to a rocket propulsion system, the mass ratio 1\-R and pro
pellant fraction { are different from those that apply to a vehicle as described
above. Here the initial or loaded mass m consists of the inert propulsion mass
0
(the hardware necessary to burn and store the propellant) and the effective
propellant mass. It would exclude masses of nonpropulsive components, such
as payload or guidance devices. For example, in a liquid propellant rocket
engine the final or inert propulsion mass m would include the propellant
1
feed tanks, the pressurization system (with turbopump and/or gas pressure
system), one or more thrust chambers, various piping, fittings and valves, an
engine mount or engine structure, filters and some sensors. The residual or
unusable remaining propellant is usually considered to be part of the final
inert mass m , as it will be in this book. However, some rocket propulsion
1
manufacturers and some literature assign residuals to be part of the propellant
mass mp- When applied to a rocket propulsion system, the value of the pro
pellant mass fraction { indicates the quality of the design; a value of, say, 0.91
means that only 9% of the mass is inert rocket hardware and this small fraction
contains, feeds, and burns a substantially larger mass of propellant. A high
value of { is desirable.
The impulse-to-weight ratio of a complete propulsion system is defined as the
total impulse 1
1
divided by the initial or propellant-loaded vehicle weight w 0. A
high value indicates an efficient design. Under our assumptions of constant
thrust and negligible start and stop transients, it can be expressed as
I, I,
(2-11)
+
w
0
(m1 mp)go
ls
(2-12)
The thrust to weight ratio F /w expresses the acceleration (in multiples of the
0
earth's surface acceleration of gravity) that the engine is capable of giving to its
own loaded propulsion system mass. For constant thrust the maximum value
of the thrust to weight ratio, or maximum acceleration, occurs just before
termination or burnout because the vehicle mass has been diminished by the
2.1. DEFINITIONS 31
mass of useful propellant. Values of F/w are given in Table 2-1. The thrust to
weight ratio is useful to compare different types of rocket systems.
Example 2-1. A rocket projectile has the following characteristics:
Initial mass 200 kg
Mass after rocket operation 130 kg
Payload, nonpropulsive structure, etc. 110 kg
Rocket operating duration 3.0 sec
Average specific impulse of propellant 240 sec
Determine the vehicle's mass ratio, propellant mass fraction, propellant flow rate,
thrust, thrust-to-weight ratio, acceleration of vehicle, effective exhaust velocity, total
impulse, and the impulse-to-weight ratio.
SOLUTION. Mass ratio of vehicle (Eq. 2-8) M{ = m 1/m 0 = 130/200 = 0.65; mass
ratio of rocket system M{ = m 1/m 0 = (130- 110)/(200- 110) = 0.222. Note that the
empty and initial masses of the propulsion system are 20 and 90 kg, respectively.
The propellant mass fraction (Eq. 2-9) is
{=(mo - mr )/m = (90 - 20)/90 = 0.778
0
The propellant mass is 200 - 130 = 70 kg. The propellant mass flow rate is rit = 70/3 =
23.3 kg/sec,
The thrust (Eq. 2-5) is
F = / w= 240 x 23.3 X 9.81 = 54,857 N
5
The thrust-to-weight ratio of the vehicle is
initial value F /w = 54,857 /(200 x 9.81) = 28
0
final value 54,857/(130 x 9.81) = 43
The maximum acceleration of the vehicle is 43 x 9.81 = 421 m/sec2 . The effective
exhaust velocity (Eq. 2-6) is
c = /g = 240 x 9.81 = 2354 m/ sec
5 0
The total impulse (Eqs. 2-2 and 2-5) is
1 = / w = 240 x 70 x 9.81 = 164,808 N-sec
1 5
This result can also be obtained by multiplying the thrust by the duration. The impulse
to-weight ratio of the propulsion system (Eq. 2-11) is
/1/Wo = 164,808/[(200-110)9.81] = 187
32 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
2.2. THRUST
The thrust is the force produced by a rocket propulsion system acting upon a
vehicle. In a simplified way, it is the reaction experienced by its structure due to
the ejection of matter at high velocity. It represents the same phenomenon that
pushes a garden hose backwards or makes a gun recoil. In the latter case, the
forward momentum of the bullet and the powder charge is equal to the recoil
or rearward momentum of the gun barrel. Momentum is a vector quantity and
is defined as the product of mass times velocity. All ship propellers and oars
generate their forward push at the expense of the momentum of the water or air
masses, which are accelerated towards the rear. Rocket propulsion differs from
these devices primarily in the relative magnitude of the accelerated masses and
velocities. In rocket propulsion relatively small masses are involved which are
carried within the vehicle and ejected at high velocities.
The thrust, due to a change in momentum, is given below. A derivation can
be found in earlier editions of this book. The thrust and the mass flow are
constant and the gas exit velocity is uniform and axial.
w
dm .
F =-v = mv =-v (2-13)
2 2 2
dt go
This force represents the total propulsion force when the nozzle exit pressure
equals the ambient pressure.
The pressure of the surrounding fluid (i .. e, the local atmosphere) gives rise to
the second contribution that influences the thrust. Figure 2-1 shows schema
tically the external pressure acting uniformly on the outer surface of a rocket
chamber and the gas pressures on the inside of a typical thermal rocket engine.
The size of the arrows indicates the relative magnitude of the pressure forces.
The axial thrust can be determined by integrating all the pressures acting on
areas that can be projected on a plane normal to the nozzle axis. The forces
acting radially outward are appreciable, but do not contribute to the axial
thrust because a rocket is typically an axially symmetric chamber. The condi
tions prior to entering the nozzle are essentially stagnation conditions.
Because of a fixed nozzle geometry and changes in ambient pressure due to
variations in altitude, there can be an imbalance of the external environment or
atmospheric pressure p and the local pressure p of the hot gas jet at the exit
3 2
plane of the nozzle. Thus, for a steadily operating rocket propulsion system
moving through a homogeneous atmosphere, the total thrust is equal to
(2-14)
The first term is the momentum thrust represented by the product of the
propellant mass flow rate and its exhaust velocity relative to the vehicle. The
second term represents the pressure thrust consisting of the product of the
cross-sectional area at the nozzle exit A (where the exhaust jet leaves the
2
2.2. THRUST 33
Atmosphere @ Converging nozzle section
P3
I
Nozzle Nozzle
throat exit
© ©
FIGURE 2-1. Pressure balance on chamber and nozzle interior wa11s is not uniform.
The internal gas pressure (indicated by length of arrows) is highest in the chamber (p 1)
and decreases steadily in the nozzle until it reaches the nozzle exit pressure p 2. The
external or atmospheric pressure p 3 is uniform. At the throat the pressure is p 1• The
four subscripts (shown inside circles) refer to the quantities A, v, T, and p at specific
locations.
vehicle) and the difference between the exhaust gas pressure at the exit and the
ambient fluid pressure. If the exhaust pressure is less than the surrounding fluid
pressure, the pressure thrust is negative. Because this condition gives a low
thrust and is undesirable, the rocket nozzle is usually so designed that the
exhaust pressure is equal or slightly higher than the ambient fluid pressure.
When the ambient atmosphere pressure is equal to the exhaust pressure, the
pressure term is zero and the thrust is the same as in Eq. 2-13. In the vacuum
of space p = 0 and the thrust becomes
3
(2-15)
The pressure condition in which the exhaust pressure is exactly matched to
the surrounding fluid pressure (p 2 = p 3) is referred to as the rocket nozzle with
optimum expansion ratio. This is further elaborated upon in Chapter 3.
Equation 2-14 shows that the thrust of a rocket unit is independent of the
flight velocity. Because changes in ambient pressure affect the pressure thrust,
there is a variation of the rocket thrust with altitude. Because atmospheric
pressure decreases with increasing altitude, the thrust and the specific impulse
will increase as the vehicle is propelled to higher altitudes. This change in
pressure thrust due to altitude changes can amount to between 10 and 30%
of the overall thrust, as is shown for a typical rocket engine in Fig. 2-2. Table
8-1 shows the sea level and high altitude thrust for several rocket engines.
Appendix 2 gives the properties of the Standard Atmosphere (ambient
pressure).
34 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
213,700 lb!
I
290 sec
Specific impulse
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Altitude, ft x 103
FIGURE 2-2. Altitude performance of RS 27 liquid propellant rocket engine used in
early versions of the Delta launch vehicle.
2.3. EXHAUST VELOCITY
The effective exhaust velocity as defined by Eq. 2-6 applies to all rockets that
thermodynamically expand hot gas in a nozzle and, indeed, to all mass expul
sion systems. From Eq. 2-14 and for constant propellant mass flow this can be
modified to
(2-16)
Equation 2-6 shows that c can be determined from thrust and propellant flow
measurements. When p 2 = p 3, the effective exhaust velocity c is equal to the
average actual exhaust velocity of the propellant gases v 2. When p 2 # p 3 then
c # v 2. The second term of the right-hand side of Eq. 2-16 is usually small in
relation to v 2; thus the effective exhaust velocity is usually close in value to the
actual exhaust velocity. When c = v the thrust (from Eq. 2-14) can be rewrit
2
ten as
(2-17)
The characteristic velocity has been used frequently in the rocket propulsion
literature. Its symbol c*, pronounced "cee-star," is defined as
(2-18)
The characteristic velocity c* is used in comparing the relative performance of
different chemical rocket propulsion system designs and propellants; it is easily
m,
determined from measured data of p 1, and A 1• It relates to the efficiency of
the combustion and is essentially independent of nozzle characteristics.
2.3. EXHAUST VELOCITY 35
However, the specific impulse ls and the effective exhaust velocity c are func
tions of the nozzle geometry, such as the nozzle area ratio A 2/ A 1, as shown in
Chapter 3. Some values of ls and c* are given in Tables 5--4 and 5-5.
Example 2-2. The following measurements were made in a sea level test of a solid
propellant rocket motor:
Burn duration 40 sec
Initial mass before test 1210 kg
Mass of rocket motor after test 215 kg
Average thrust 62,250 N
Chamber pressure 7.00 MPa
Nozzle exit pressure 0.070 MPa
Nozzle throat diameter 0.0855 m
Nozzle exit diameter 0.2703 m
Determine ri1, v 2, c*, c, and Is at sea level, and c and ls at 1000 and 25,000 m altitude.
Assume an invariant thrust and mass flow rate and negligible short start and stop
transients.
SOLUTION. The mass flow rate mis determined from the total propellant used (initial
motor mass - final motor mass) and the burn time.
m= (1210 - 215)/40 = 24.9 kg/ sec
The nozzle areas at the throat and exit are
A = nD2 /4 = n x 0.08552 /4 = 0.00574 m2
1
A = nD2 /4 = n x 0.27032 /4 = 0.0574 m2
2
Equation 2-14 is to be solved for v 2, the actual average exhaust velocity.
V2 = F /m - (p2 - p3)A2/1n
= 62,250/24.9 -(0.070-0.1013)106 X 0.0574/24.9
= 2572 m/sec
The characteristic velocity and effective exhaust velocity are found from Eqs. 2-6 and 2-
18 for sea level conditions.
c* = P1At!m = 7.00 x 106 x 0.00574/24.9 = 1613 m/ sec
ls= F/mgo = 62,250/(24.9 X 9.81) = 255 sec
c = lsgo = 255 x 9.81 = 2500 m/ sec
For altitudes of 1000 and 25,000 m the ambient pressure (see Appendix 2) is 0.0898 and
0.00255 MPa. From Eq. 2-16 the altitude values of c can be obtained.
36 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
At 1000 m altitude,
c = 2572 + (0.070 - 0.0898) x 106 x 0.0574/24.9 = 2527 m/ sec
Is = 2527 /9 .81 = 258 sec
At 25,000 m altitude,
c = 2572 + (0.070 - 0.00255) x 106 x 0.0574/24.9 = 2727 m/ sec
ls = 2727 /9.80 = 278 sec
2.4. ENERGY AND EFFICIENCIES
Although efficiencies are not commonly used directly in designing rocket units,
they permit an understanding of the energy balance of a rocket system. Their
definitions are arbitrary, depending on the losses considered, and any consis
tent set of efficiencies, such as the one presented in this section, is satisfactory in
evaluating energy losses. As stated previously, two types of energy conversion
processes occur in any propulsion system, namely, the generation of energy,
which is really the conversion of stored energy into available energy and,
subsequently, the conversion to the form in which a reaction thrust can be
obtained. The kinetic energy of ejected matter is the form of energy useful for
propulsion. The power of the jet Pjet is the time rate of expenditure of this
energy, and for a constant gas ejection velocity v this is a function of Is and F
P j et = 2I m· v2 = 2I ·w gols2 = 2I Fg o J s = 2I F V 2 (2-19)
The term specific power is sometimes used as a measure of the utilization of
the mass of the propulsion system including its power source; it is the jet power
divided by the loaded propulsion system mass, Pjei/m 0. For electrical propul
sion systems which carry a heavy, relatively inefficient energy source, the spe
cific power can be much lower than that of chemical rockets. The energy input
from the energy source to the rocket propulsion system has different forms in
different rocket types. For chemical rockets the energy is created by combus
tion. The maximum energy available per unit mass of chemical propellants is
the heat of the combustion reaction QR; the power input to a chemical engine is
(2-20)
where J is a conversion constant which depends on the units used. A large
portion of the energy of the exhaust gases is unavailable for conversion into
kinetic energy and leaves the nozzle as residual enthalpy. This is analogous to
the energy lost in the high-temperature exhaust gases of internal combustion
engmes.
2.4. ENERGY AND EFFICIENCIES 37
The combustion efficiency for chemical rockets is the ratio of the actual and
the ideal heat of reaction per unit of propellant and is a measure of the source
efficiency for creating energy. Its value is high (approximately 94 to 99%), and
it is defined in Chapter 5. When the power input Pchem is multiplied by the
combustion efficiency, it becomes the power available to the propulsive device,
where it is converted into the kinetic power of the exhaust jet. In electric
propulsion the analogous efficiency is the power conversion efficiency. For
solar cells it has a low value; it is the efficiency for converting solar radiation
energy into electric power (10 to 20%).
The power transmitted to the vehicle at any one time is defined in terms of the
thrust of the propulsion system F and the vehicle velocity u:
Pvehicle = Fu (2-21)
The internal efficiency of a rocket propulsion system is an indication of the
effectiveness of converting the system's energy input to the propulsion device
into the kinetic energy of the ejected matter; for example, for a chemical unit it
is the ratio of the kinetic power of the ejected gases expressed by Eq. 2-19
divided by the power input of the chemical reaction as given in Eq. 2-20.
Internal efficiencies are used in Example 2-3. The energy balance diagram
for a chemical rocket (Fig. 2-3) shows typical losses. The internal efficiency
can be expressed as
kinetic power in jet
! mv2
l'/int = = (2-22)
available chemical power l'/combPchem
Heat loss to walls
Combustion loss
(poor mixing,
incomplete burning)
Residual kinetic energy
of exhaust gases
100% 99% 97% Oto 50%
Useful energy for
vehicle propulsion
Kinetic energy of exhaust jet
Total energy of exhaust jet
Available energy in combustion chamber
Heating value of propellants
FIGURE 2-3. Typical energy balance diagram for a chemical rocket.
38 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
Typical values of 1/int are listed later in Example 2-3.
The propulsive efficiency (Fig. 2-4) determines how much of the kinetic
energy of the exhaust jet is useful for propelling a vehicle. It is also used
often with duct jet engines and is defined as
vehicle power
1/p = -----------------
vehicle power + residual kinetic jet power
(2-23)
Fu 2u/c
I+ (u/c)2
where F is the thrust, u the absolute vehicle velocity, c the effective rocket
w
exhaust velocity with respect to the vehicle, the propellant weight flow
rate, and 1/p the propulsive efficiency. The propulsive efficiency is a maximum
when the forward vehicle velocity is exactly equal to the exhaust velocity. Then
the residual kinetic energy and the absolute velocity of the jet are zero and the
exhaust gases stand still in space.
While it is desirable to use energy economically and thus have high efficien
cies, there is also the problem of minimizing the expenditure of ejected mass,
which in many cases is more important than minimizing the energy. In nuclear
reactor energy and some solar energy sources, for example, there is an almost
unlimited amount of heat energy available; yet the vehicle can only carry a
limited amount of working fluid. Economy of mass expenditures of working
fluid can be obtained if the exhaust velocity is high. Because the specific
impulse is proportional to the exhaust velocity, it is a measure of this propel
lant mass economy.
".E,
::'. 80 t----t----+---+-------"1-....:---+-----i
8.
:,;
g 60 1------Jc......+---+---+------+---+--~
.!!!
"
!40t-+---+---+---+------+----+------i
"iii
:i
~20t-+----+---+---+------+----+------i
ct
1.0 2.0 3.0
Velocity ratio, u/c
FIGURE 2-4. Propulsive efficiency at varying velocities.
2.5. TYPICAL PERFORMANCE VALUES 39
2.5. TYPICAL PERFORMANCE VALUES
Typical values of representative performance parameters for different types of
rocket propulsion are given in Table 2-1 and in Fig. 2-5.
Chemical rockets have relatively low values of specific impulse, relatively
light machinery (i.e., low engine weight), a very high thrust capability, and
therefore high acceleration and high specific power. At the other extreme,
the ion propulsion devices have a very high specific impulse, but they must
carry a heavy electrical power source with them to deliver the power necessary
for high ejection velocities. The very low acceleration potential for the electrical
propulsion units and those using solar radiation energy usually requires a long
period for accelerating and thus these systems are best used for missions where
the flight time is long. The low thrust values of electrical systems imply that
they are not useful in fields of strong gravitational gradients (for takeoff or
landing) but are best used in a true space flight mission.
The chemical systems (solid and liquid propellant rockets) are fully devel
oped and widely used for many different vehicle applications. They are
described in Chapters 5 to 15. Electrical propulsion has been in operation in
many space flight applications (see Chapter 19). Some of the other types are
still in their exploratory or development phase, but may become useful.
Example 2-3. As a comparison of different propulsion systems, compute the energy
input and the propellant flow required for 100 N thrust with several types of propulsion
systems.
SOLUTION. From Equations 2-13 and 2-19,
m
= F/(l,g 0)
power m· put = p jet / T/int = 2I m· v22 / T/int
From Table 2-1 typical values of ls and from experience typical internal efficiencies were
selected. Depending on the propellant and the design, these values may vary somewhat.
The equations above were solved form and the power input as indicated in the table below.
m
Power Input
V2
Engine Type 1Jint ls (m/sec) (kg/sec) (kW)
Chemical rocket 0.50 300 2940 0.0340 294
Nuclear fission 0.50 800 7840 0.0128 787
Arc--electrothermal 0.50 600 5880 0.0170 588
Ion electrostatic 0.90 2000 19,600 0.0051 1959
More than half a megawatt of power is needed for the last three propulsion systems, but
the propellant flows are small. The data for the last two types are illustrative, but
hypothetical. To date the largest experimental units have been about 120 kW for arcjets
and perhaps 10 kW with ion propulsion. Although thruster designs for megawatt-level
units are feasible, it is unlikely that the needed flight-qualified electrical power generator
would be available in the next decade.
""'
0
TABLE 2-1. Ranges of Typical Performance Parameters for Various Rocket Propulsion Systems
Specific Maximum Specific Typical
Impulsea Temperature Thrust-to- Propulsion Pow ere Working Status of
Engine Type (sec) (°C) Weight Ratioh Duration (kW/kg) Fluid Technology
Chemical-solid or 200-410 2500-4100 10-2-100 Seconds to a 10-1-103 Liquid or solid Flight proven
liquid bipropellant few minutes propellants
Liquid monopropellant 180-223 600-800 10-1-10-2 Seconds to 0.02-200 N2H4 Flight proven
minutes
Nuclear fission 500-860 2700 10-2-30 Seconds to 10-1-103 H2 Development
minutes was stopped
Resistojet 150-300 2900 10-2_10-4 Days 10-3-10-1 H 2, N2H4 Flight proven
Arc heating---electrothermal 280-1200 20,000 10-4-10-2 Days 10-3-1 N H ,H ,NH Flight proven
2 4 2 3
Electromagnetic including 700-2500 10-6-10-4 Weeks 10-3-1 H2 Flight proven
Pulsed Plasma (PP) Solid for PP
Hall effect 1000-1700 10-4 Weeks 10-1-5 X 10-l Xe Flight proven
Ion---electrostatic 1200-5000 10-6-10--4 Months 10-3-1 Xe Several have
flown
Solar heating 400-700 1300 10-3-10-2 Days 10-2-1 H2 In development
a At p 1 = 1000 psia and optimum gas expansion at sea level (Ip 2 = p 3 = 14.7 psia).
hRatio of thrust force to full propulsion system sea level weight (with propellants, but without payload).
"Kinetic power per unit exhaust mass flow.
PROBLEMS 41
100,000,-----,---rrTTffl",----,---rrTTffl",----,---rrTTffl",----,---rrTTffl",----,---rrTTffl",----,---rrTTffl",......,--rTTTffl",......,--rTTTffl",......,---rr~
Electrostatic
I( D.) and
~ 20,000
~
·u
~ 10,000
>
8000
600LllillUJLUlUJI!t""tl'~~~~~~~tlffl!!"':lJ.WlJLlJJJJlill__J_WUill
10-6 10 100 1000
Acceleration in multiples of earth gravity g or thrust to
0
vehicle weight ratio
FIGURE 2-5. Exhaust velocities as a function of typical vehicle accelerations. Regions
indicate approximate performance values for different types of propulsion systems. The
mass of the vehicle includes the propulsion system, but the payload is assumed to be
zero.
PROBLEMS
When solving problems, three appendixes (see end of book) may be helpful:
Appendix 1. Conversion Factors and Constants
Appendix 2. Properties of the Earth's Standard Atmosphere
Appendix 3. Summary of Key Equations
I. Prove that the value of the reaction thrust F equals twice the total dynamic pressure
across the area A for an incompressible fluid as shown below.
w
Flow rate C2
1
===1)~L
Force F
--= =-------
'777:~~~~~~~;;;,
Area A
~
42 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
2. The following data are given for a certain rocket unit: thrust, 8896 N; propellant
consumption, 3.867 kg/sec; velocity of vehicle, 400 m/sec; energy content of propel
lant, 6.911 MJ/kg. Assume 100% combustion efficiency.
Determine (a) the effective velocity; (b) the kinetic jet energy rate per unit flow of
propellant; (c) the internal efficiency; (d) the propulsive efficiency; (e) the overall
efficiency; (/) the specific impulse; (g) the specific propellant consumption.
Answers: (a) 2300 m/sec; (b) 2.645 MJ-sec/kg; (c) 38.3%; (d) 33.7%; (e) 13.3%; (/)
234.7 sec; (g) 0.00426 sec-1 .
3. A certain rocket has an effective exhaust velocity of 7000 ft/sec; it consumes
280 lbm/sec of propellant mass, each of which liberates 2400 Btu/lbm. The unit
operates for 65 sec. Construct a set of curves plotting the propulsive, internal, and
overall efficiencies versus the velocity ratio u/ c (0 < u/ c < 1.0). The rated flight velo
city equals 5000 ft/sec. Calculate (a) the specific impulse; (b) the total impulse; (c) the
mass of propellants required; (d) the volume that the propellants occupy if their
average specific gravity is 0.925.
Answers: (a) 217.5 sec; (b) 3,960,000 !bf-sec; (c) 18,200 lbm; (d) 315 ft3 .
4. For the rocket in Problem 2, calculate the specific power, assuming a propulsion
system dry mass of 80 kg and a duration of 3 min.
5. For the values given in Table 2-1 for the various propulsion systems, calculate the
total impulse for a fixed propellant mass of 2000 kg.
6. A jet of fluid hits a stationary flat plate in the manner shown below.
(a) If there is 50 kg of fluid flowing per minute at an abolute velocity of 200 m/sec,
what will be the force on the plate?
Answer: 167 N.
(b) What will this force be when the plate moves in the direction of flow at u = 50
km/h?
Answer: 144 N.
\it.
J
Velocityc
-~~~P~late:\
Jjf'
7. Plot the variation of the thrust and specific impulse against altitude, using the
atmospheric pressure information given in Appendix 2, and the data for the
Minuteman first-stage rocket thrust chamber in Table 11-3. Assume that
p = 8.66 psia.
2
8. Derive an equation relating the mass ratio l\R and the propellant mass fraction.
Answer: ;; = I - l\R.
SYMBOLS 43
SYMBOLS (English engineering units are given in parentheses)
A area, m2 (ft2 )
A 1 nozzle throat area, m2 (ft2 )
A2 exist area of nozzle, m2 (ft2 )
c effective velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
c* characteristic velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
E energy, J (ft-lbf)
F thrust force, N (!bf)
g standard sea level acceleration of gravity, 9.80665 m/sec2
0
(32.174 ft/sec2 )
I., specific impulse, sec
1 impulse or total impulse, N-sec (!bf-sec)
1
J conversion factor or mechanical equivalent of heat, 4.184 J/cal or 1055
J/Btu or 778 ft-lbf/Btu.
m mass, kg (slugs) (I slug = mass of 32.174 lb of weight at sea level)
m mass flow rate, kg/sec (lbm/sec)
m final mass (after rocket propellant is ejected), kg (lbm or slugs)
1
mp propellant mass, kg (lbm or slugs)
m initial mass (before rocket propellant is ejected), kg (lbm or slugs)
0
l\!R mass ratio (m1/mo)
p pressure, pascal [Pa] or N/m2 (lbf/ft2 )
p 3 ambient or atmospheric pressure, Pa (lbf/ft2 )
p 2 rocket gas pressure at nozzle exit, Pa (lbf/ft2 )
P1 chamber pressure, Pa (lbf/ft2 )
P power, J/sec (ft-lbf/sec)
P specific power, J/sec-kg (ft-lbf/sec-lbm)
5
QR heat of reaction per unit propellant, J/kg (Btu/lbm)
time, sec
u vehicle velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
v gas velocity leaving the rocket, m/sec (ft/sec)
2
w weight, N or kg-m/sec2 (!bf)
w
weight flow rate, N/sec (!bf/sec)
w initial weight, N or kg-m/sec2 (!bf)
0
Greek Letters
i; propellant mass fraction
T/ efficiency
T/comb combustion efficiency
T/int internal efficiency
T/p propulsive efficiency
44 DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
REFERENCES
2-1. "American National Standard Letter Symbols for Rocket Propulsion," ASME
Publication Y 10.14, 1959.
2-2. "Solid Propulsion Nomenclature Guide," CPIA Publication 80, Chemical
Propulsion Information Agency, Johns Hopkins University, Laurel, MD., May
1965, 18 pages.
CHAPTER 3
NOZZLE THEORY AND
THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
Thermodynamic relations of the processes inside a rocket nozzle and chamber
furnish the mathematical tools needed to calculate the performance and deter
mine several of the key design parameters of rocket propulsion systems. They
are useful as a means of evaluating and comparing the performance of various
rocket systems; they permit the prediction of the operating performance of any
rocket unit that uses the thermodynamic expansion of a gas, and the determi
nation of several necessary design parameters, such as nozzle size and generic
shape, for any given performance requirement. This theory applies to chemical
rocket propulsion systems (both liquid and solid propellant types), nuclear
rockets, solar heated and resistance or arc heated electrical rocket systems,
and to any propulsion system that uses the expansion of a gas as the propulsive
mechanism for ejecting matter at high velocity.
These thermodynamic relations, which are fundamental and important in
analysis and design of rocket units, are introduced and explained in this chap
ter. The utilization of these equations should give the reader a basic under
standing of the thermodynamic processes involved in rocket gas behavior and
expansion. A knowledge of elementary thermodynamics and fluid mechanics
on the part of the reader is assumed (see Refs. 1-1, 3-1, 3-2, and 3-3). This
chapter also addresses different nozzle configurations, non-optimum perfor
mance, energy losses, nozzle alignment, variable thrust and four different ways
for establishing nozzle performance parameters.
45
46 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
3.1. IDEAL ROCKET
The concept of ideal rocket propulsion systems is useful because the relevant
basic thermodynamic principles can be expressed as simple mathematical rela
tionships, which are given in subsequent sections of this chapter. These equa
tions theoretically describe a quasi-one-dimensional nozzle flow, which
corresponds to an idealization and simplification of the full two- or three
dimensional equations and the real aerothermochemical behavior. However,
with the assumptions and simplifications stated below, they are very adequate
for obtaining useful solutions to many rocket propulsion systems. For chemical
rocket propulsion the measured actual performance is usually between I and
6% below the calculated ideal value. In designing new rockets, it has become
accepted practice to use ideal rocket parameters which can then be modified by
appropriate corrections, such as those discussed in Section 5 of this chapter. An
ideal rocket unit is one for which the following assumptions are valid:
I. The working substance (or chemical reaction products) is homogeneous.
2. All the species of the working fluid are gaseous. Any condensed phases
(liquid or solid) add a negligible amount to the total mass.
3. The working substance obeys the perfect gas law.
4. There is no heat transfer across the rocket walls; therefore, the flow is
adiabatic.
5. There is no appreciable friction and all boundary layer effects are
neglected.
6. There are no shock waves or discontinuities in the nozzle flow.
7. The propellant flow is steady and constant. The expansion of the working
fluid is uniform and steady, without vibration. Transient effects (i.e.,
start up and shut down) are of very short duration and may be
neglected.
8. All exhaust gases leaving the rocket have an axially directed velocity.
9. The gas velocity, pressure, temperature, and density are all uniform
across any section normal to the nozzle axis.
10. Chemical equilibrium is established within the rocket chamber and the
gas composition does not change in the nozzle (frozen flow).
11. Stored propellants are at room temperature. Cryogenic propellants are
at their boiling points.
These assumptions permit the derivation of a simple, quasi-one-dimensional
theory as developed in subsequent sections. Later in this book we present more
sophisticated theories or introduce correction factors for several of the items on
the list, and they allow a more accurate determination of the simplified analy
sis. The next paragraph explains why these assumptions cause only small
errors.
3.2. SUMMARY OF THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS 47
For a liquid propellant rocket the idealized theory postulates an injection
system in which the fuel and oxidizer are mixed perfectly so that a homoge
neous working substance results. A good rocket injector can approach this
condition closely. For a solid propellant rocket unit, the propellant must essen
tially be homogeneous and uniform and the burning rate must be steady. For
nuclear, solar-heated or arc-heated rockets, it is assumed that the hot gases are
uniform in temperature at any cross-section and steady in flow. Because cham
ber temperatures are typically high (2500 to 3600 K for common propellants),
all gases are well above their respective saturation conditions and actually
follow the perfect gas law very closely. Postulates 4, 5, and 6 above allow
the use of the isentropic expansion relations in the rocket nozzle, thereby
describing the maximum conversion of heat to kinetic energy of the jet. This
also implies that the nozzle flow is thermodynamically reversible. Wall friction
losses are difficult to determine accurately but they are usually small in nozzles.
Except for very small chambers, the energy lost as heat to the walls of the
rocket is usually less than 1% (occasionally up to 2%) of the total energy and
can therefore be neglected. Short-term fluctuations of the steady propellant
flow rate and pressure are usually less than 5% of the rated value, their effect
on rocket performance is small and can be neglected. In well-designed super
sonic nozzles, the conversion of thermal energy into directed kinetic energy of
the exhaust gases proceeds smoothly and without normal shocks or disconti
nuities; thus the flow expansion losses are generally small.
Some companies and some authors do not include all or the same eleven
items listed above in their definition of an ideal rocket. For example, instead of
assumption 8 (all nozzle exit velocity is axially directed), some use a conical exit
nozzle with a 15° half-angle as their base configuration in their ideal nozzle;
this discounts the divergence losses, which are described later in this chapter.
3.2. SUMMARY OF THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
In this section we review briefly some of the basic relationships needed for the
development of the nozzle flow equations. Rigorous derivations and discus
sions of these relations can be found in many thermodynamics or fluid
dynamics texts, such as Refs. 3-1 and 3-2.
The principle of conservation of energy can be readily applied to the adia
batic, no shaft-work process inside the nozzle. Furthermore, without shocks or
friction, the flow entropy change is zero. The concept of enthalpy is useful in
flow systems; the enthalpy comprises the internal thermal energy plus the fl.ow
work (or work performed by the gas at a velocity v in crossing a boundary). For
ideal gases the enthalpy can conveniently be expressed as the product of the
specific heat cP times the absolute temperature T (the specific heat at constant
pressure is formally defined as the partial derivative of the enthalpy with
respect to temperature at constant pressure). Under the above assumptions,
the total or stagnation enthalpy per unit mass h is constant, i.e.,
0
48 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
h = h + v2 /21 = constant (3-1)
0
In the above, J is the mechanical equivalent of heat which is inserted only when
thermal units (i.e., the Btu and calorie) are mixed with mechanical units (i.e.,
the ft-lbf and the joule). In SI units (kg, m, sec) the value of J is one. In the
English Engineering system of units another constant (see Appendix 1) has to
be provided to account for the mass units (i.e., the lbm). The conservation of
energy for isentropic flow between any two sections x and y shows that the
decrease in enthalpy or thermal content of the flow appears as an increase of
kinetic energy since and any changes in potential energy may be neglected.
(3-2)
The principle of conservatism of mass in a steady flow with a single inlet and
m
single outlet is expressed by equating the mass flow rate at any section x to
that at any other section y; this is known in mathematical form as the con
tinuity equation. Written in terms of the cross-sectional area A, the velocity v,
and the specific volume V,
m, =my= m
= Av/V (3-3)
The perfect gas law is written as
p,V, = RT, (3--4)
where the gas constant R is found from the universal gas constant R' divided by
the molecular mass 9J1 of the flowing gas mixture. The molecular volume at
standard conditions becomes 22.41 m3 /kg-mo! or ft3 /lb-mo! and it relates to a
value of R' = 8314.3 J/kg-mole-K or 1544 ft-lbf/lb-mole-R. One often finds Eq.
3-3 written in terms of density p which is the reciprocal of the specific volume
V. The specific heat at constant pressure cp, the specific heat at constant
volume cv, and their ratio k are constant for perfect gases over a wide range
of temperatures and are related.
k = cp/cv (3-5a)
cp-Cv=R/J (3-5b)
cP = kR/(k - l)J (3-6)
For an isentropicfiow process the following relations hold between any points x
and y:
(3-7)
3.2. SUMMARY OF THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS 49
During an isentropic nozzle expansion the pressure drops substantially, the
absolute temperature drops somewhat less, and the specific volume increases.
When a flow is stopped isentropically the prevailing conditions are known as
stagnation conditions and are designated by the subscript "O". Sometimes the
word "total" is used instead of stagnation. As can be seen from Eq. 3-1 the
stagnation enthalpy consists of the sum of the static or local enthalpy and the
fluid kinetic energy. The stagnation temperature T is found from the energy
0
equation as
(3-8)
where Tis the absolute fluid static temperature. In adiabatic flows, the stagna
tion temperature remains constant. The relationship of the stagnation pressure
to the local pressure in the flow can be found from the previous two equations:
(3-9)
When the local velocity comes close to zero, the local temperature and pressure
will approach the stagnation pressure and stagnation temperature. In a com
bustion chamber, where the gas velocity is small, the local combustion pressure
is essentially equal to the stagnation pressure. The velocity of sound a or the
acoustic velocity in ideal gases is independent of pressure. It is defined as
(3-10)
In the English Engineering (EE) system the value of R has to be corrected and
the constant g is added. Equation 3-10 becomes Jg kRT. This correction
0 0
factor must be applied wherever R is used in EE units. The Mach number Mis a
dimensionless flow parameter and is used to define the ratio of the flow velocity
v to the local acoustic velocity a.
M = v/a = v/-Jkifi' (3-11)
A Mach number less than one corresponds to subsonic flow and greater than
one to supersonic flow. When the Mach number is equal to one then the flow is
moving at precisely the velocity of sound. It is shown later that at the throat of
all supersonic nozzles the Mach number must be equal to one. The relation
between stagnation temperature and Mach number can now be written from
Eqs. 3-2, 3-7, and 3-10 as
(3-12)
or
50 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
M j-2 i)
(To _
=
k-1 T
T and p designate the stagnation values of the temperature and pressure.
0 0
Unlike the temperature, the stagnation pressure during an adiabatic nozzle
expansion remains constant only for isentropic flows. It can be computed from
(3-13)
The area ratio for a nozzle with isentropic flow can be expressed in terms of
Mach numbers for any points x and y within the nozzle. This relationship,
along with those for the ratios T /To and p/p 0, is plotted in Fig. 3-1 for Ax= At
and Mx = 1.0. Otherwise,
1 + [(k - l)/2]M}}Ck+I)/Ck-I)
(3-14)
{ 1 + [(k - 1)/2]M~
As can be seen from Fig. 3-1, for subsonic flow the chamber contraction ratio
A ii At can be small, with values of 3 to 6, and the passage is convergent. There
is no noticeable effect from variations of k. In solid rocket motors the chamber
area A refers to the flow passage or port cavity in the virgin grain. With
1
supersonic flow the nozzle section diverges and the area ratio becomes large
very quickly; the area ratio is significantly influenced by the value of k. The
area ratio A 2/ At ranges between 15 and 30 at M = 4, depending on the value of
k. On the other hand, pressure ratios depend little on k whereas temperature
ratios show more variation.
The average molecular mass 9R of a mixture of gases is the sum of all the
molar fractions n; multiplied by the molecular mass of each chemical species
(n;fil1;) and then divided by the sum of all molar mass fractions. This is further
elaborated upon in Chapter 5. The symbol 9R is used to avoid confusion with
M for the Mach number. In many pieces of rocket literature 9R is called
molecular weight.
Example 3-1. An ideal rocket chamber is to operate at sea level using propellants whose
combustion products have a specific heat ratio k of 1.30. Determine the required cham
ber pressure and nozzle area ratio between throat and exit if the nozzle exit Mach
number is 2.40. The nozzle inlet Mach number may be considered to be negligibly small.
SOLUTION. For optimum expansion the nozzle exit pressure should be equal to the
atmospheric pressure which has the value 0.1013 MPa. If the chamber velocity is small,
the chamber pressure is equal to the total or stagnation pressure, which is, from
Eq. 3-13,
3.2. SUMMARY OF THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS 51
500
I Il
H=
I
k= 1.20 I
I : I
k= 1.30
,' I
I
I-=' - I
j:::: 1.0 100
~0 ---. .......
'
......... .. .. ..
. ....
!_!To II I II I
~ ' "'' I I
:::J \. "' I
~ ~I 1
aQ). \ \
2E \ 'if\'
""O I '
_C agl \ II \ I\
\
//
eQ. \
0 0.10 \ \ 10
\ I
\ I '\
~ \ ~, I '\
: C:: fJ
) "'
\
\
:,I
Cf)
~ "
a..
"'
I~
"'
l\
"' y "
" \plpo
I
i'-,...
0.01 1.0
0.10 1.0 10
Mach number
FIGURE 3-1. Relationship of area ratio, pressure ratio, and temperature ratio as
functions of Mach number in a De Laval nozzle for the subsonic and supersonic nozzle
regions.
Po= p[l + 1(k - l)M2 (<k-l)
= 0.1013[1 + 1 x 0.30 x 2.402 { 3103 = 1.51 MPa
The nozzle area is determined from Eq. 3-14 by setting M = 1.0 at the throat (see also
1
Fig. 3-1):
1.0 I+ 0.15 X 2.42)23/03 = 2.64
2.40 ( I +0.15
52 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES
In a converging-diverging nozzle a large fraction of the thermal energy of the
gases in the chamber is converted into kinetic energy. As will be explained, the
gas pressure and temperature drop dramatically and the gas velocity can reach
values in excess of two miles per second. This is a reversible, essentially isen
tropic flow process and its analysis is described here. If a nozzle inner wall has a
flow obstruction or a wall protrusion (a piece of weld splatter or slag), then the
kinetic gas enery is locally converted back into thermal energy essentially equal
to the stagnation temperature and stagnation pressure in the chamber. Since
this would lead quickly to a local overheating and failure of the wall, nozzle
inner walls have to be smooth without any protrusion. Stagnation conditions
can also occur at the leading edge of a jet vane ( described in Chapter 16) or at
the tip of a gas sampling tube inserted into the flow.
Velocity
From Eq. 3-2 the nozzle exit velocity v can be found:
2
(3.15a)
This equation applies to ideal and non-ideal rockets. For constant k this
expression can be rewritten with the aid of Eqs. 3-6 and 3-7. The subscripts
I and 2 apply to the nozzle inlet and exit conditions respectively:
02)(k-l)/k] 2
2k [
--RT 1- - +v (3.15b)
k- I 1 i i
This equation also holds for any two points within the nozzle. When the
chamber section is large compared to the nozzle throat section, the chamber
vf
velocity or nozzle approach velocity is comparatively small and the term can
be neglected. The chamber temperature T is at the nozzle inlet and, under
1
isentropic conditions, differs little from the stagnation temperature or (for a
chemical rocket) from the combustion temperature. This leads to an important
simplified expression of the exhaust velocity v 2, which is often used in the
analysis.
02)(k-l)/k]
2k [
--RT 1- -
k-1 1
1
(3-16)
[1 -
---3.!5__ R'To (P__2)<k-l)/k]
V1
k-] 9Jl
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 53
It can be seen that the exhaust velocity of a nozzle is a function of the pressure
ratio pifp 2, the ratio of specific heats k, and the absolute temperature at the
nozzle inlet T 1, as well as the gas constant R. Because the gas constant for any
particular gas is inversely proportional to the molecular mass 9'.n, the exhaust
velocity or the specific impulse are a function of the ratio of the absolute nozzle
entrance temperature divided by the molecular mass, as is shown in Fig. 3-2.
This ratio plays an important role in optimizing the mixture ratio in chemical
rockets.
Equations 2-14 and 2-15 give the relations between the velocity v 2, the
thrust F, and the specific impulse ls; it is plotted in Fig. 3-2 for two pressure
ratios and three values of k. Equation 3-16 indicates that any increase in the
gas temperature (usually caused by an increase in energy release) or any
decrease of the molecular mass of the propellant (usually achieved by using
light molecular mass gases rich in hydrogen content) will improve the perfor
manace of the rocket; that is, they will increase the specific impulse ls or the
exhaust velocity v or c and, thus, the performance of the vehicle. The influ
2
ences of the pressure ratio across the nozzle p 1/ p 2 and of the specific heat ratio
k are less pronounced. As can be seen from Fig. 3-2, performance increases
260
5000
140 ~Y-~-+--'----'--,..-~-+~-+~-+~-+~--+~--+~---14500
120L-"'---~.,__~.,__~.,__~-'-~-'-~-'-~-'-~....._~....._~4000
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280
T1!mt, R-lb-mol/lbm
50 75 100 125 150
T1/mt, K-kg-mol/kg
FIGURE 3-2. Specific impulse and exhaust velocity of an ideal rocket at optimum
nozzle expansion as functions of the absolute chamber temperature T and the mole
1
cular mass 9J1 for several values of k and p 1/p 2•
54 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
with an increase of the pressure ratio; this ratio increases when the value of the
chamber pressure p increases or when the exit pressure p decreases, corre
1 2
sponding to high altitude designs. The small influence of k-values is fortuitous
because low molecular masses are found in diatomic or monatomic gases,
which have the higher values of k.
For comparing specific impulse values from one rocket system to another or
for evaluating the influence of various design parameters, the value of the
pressure ratio must be standardized. A chamber pressure of 1000 psia (6.894
MPa) and an exit pressure of I atm (0.1013 MPa) are generally in use today.
For optimum expansion p = p and the effective exhaust velocity c (Eq. 2-
2 3
16) and the ideal rocket exhaust velocity are related, namely
(3-17)
and c can be substituted for v in Eqs. 3-15 and 3-16. For a fixed nozzle exit
2
area ratio, and constant chamber pressure, this optimum condition occurs only
at a particular altitude where the ambient pressure p happens to be equal to
3
the nozzle exhaust pressure p 2• At all other altitudes c =I= v 2•
The maximum theoretical value of the nozzle outlet velocity is reached with
an infinite expansion (exhausting into a vacuum).
(3-18)
This maximum theoretical exhaust velocity is finite, even though the pressure
ratio is infinite, because it represents the finite thermal energy content of the
fluid. Such an expansion does not happen, because, among other things, the
temperature of many of the working medium species will fall below their
liquefaction or the freezing points; thus they cease to be a gas and no longer
contribute to the gas expansion.
Example 3-2. A rocket operates at sea level (p = 0.1013 MPa) with a chamber pressure
of p = 2.068 MPa or 300 psia, a chamber temperature of T = 2222 K, and a propel
1 1
lant consumption of m= I kg/sec. (Let k = 1.30, R = 345.7 J/kg-K). Show graphically
the variation of A, v, V, and M, with respect to pressure along the nozzle. Calculate the
ideal thrust and the ideal specific impulse.
SOLUTION. Select a series of pressure values and calculate for each pressure the
corresponding values of v, V, and A. A sample calculation is given below. The initial
specific volume V is calculated from the equation of state of a perfect gas, Eq. 3-4:
1
Vr = RTr/p 1 = 345.7 x 2222/(2.068 x 106 ) = 0.3714 m3 /kg
In an isentropic flow at a point of intermediate pressure, say at Px = 1.379 MPa or 200
psi, the specific volume and the temperature are, from Eq. 3-7,
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 55
Vx = V1(p1/Px)11 k = 0.3714(2.068/1.379)1 /13 = 0.5072 m3 /kg
Tx = T1(px/Pdk-!)/k = 2222(1.379/2.068)038113 = 2023 K
The calculation of the velocity follows from Eq. 3-16:
ti[J-~t-1)/k]
Vx=
3 7
2 X J.30 X 345.7 X 2222 [ 1 (I.379)0.l 0 ] 771
1.30 - I - 2.068 = m/ sec
The cross-sectional area is found from Eq. 3-3:
Ax= mx Vx/Vx = I x 0.5072/771 = 658 cm2
The Mach number Mis, using Eq. 3-11,
Mx = Vx/JkRTx = 771/Jl.30 X 345.7 X 1932 = 0.8085
Figure 3-3 shows the variations of the velocity, specific volume, area, and Mach number
with pressure in this nozzle. At optimum expansion the ideal exhaust velocity v is equal
2
to the effective exhaust velocity c and, from Eq. 3-16, it is calculated to be 1827 m/sec.
Therefore, the thrust F and the specific impulse can be determined from Eqs. 2-6 and
2-14:
m
F = v = 1 x 1827 = I 827 N
2
ls= c/g 0 = 1827/9.80 = 186 sec
A number of interesting deductions can be made from this example. Very
high gas velocities (over 1 km/sec) can be obtained in rocket nozzles. The
temperature drop of the combustion gases flowing through a rocket nozzle is
appreciable. In the example given the temperature changed l l l 7°C in a
relatively short distance. This should not be surprising, for the increase in
the kinetic energy of the gases is derived from a decrease of the enthalpy,
which in turn is proportional to the decrease in temperature. Because the
exhaust gases are still very hot (1105 K) when leaving the nozzle, they con
tain considerable thermal energy not available for conversion into kinetic
energy of the jet.
Nozzle Flow and Throat Condition
The required nozzle area decreases to a minimum ( at 1.130 MP a or 164 psi
pressure in the previous example) and then increases again. Nozzles of this type
(often called De Laval nozzles after their inventor) consist of a convergent
section followed by a divergent section. From the continuity equation, the
56 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
Pressure, megapascal Pressure, megapascal
0
N
E
(.)
"'
~
c:r::
o _________ _.
1100 .___ ___. _ _.____._ __. ._.
5000r------,--.---.----, 3.0----~---~
<ii
.D.
E
::::,
C
.c
~ 1. 0 i----i----:,-,,,,,...-i---------;
2
o...._ __. ,__......__.,__ _ ___.
OL------'-....._---'------'
5.-----..----.--..----"""'T'I 1820----~~--~
(1)
E
::::,
~
~
(.)
(1)
C.
Cf) 0 ______. ..._ _ __,
0--~--~~---'
300 200 100 0 300 200 100 0
LPressurle, psia LPreLssure, ps ia
t t
Exit Exit
Nozzle inlet Throat Nozzle inl~hroat
FIGURE 3-3. Typical variation of cross-sectional area, temperature, specific volume,
and velocity with pressure in a rocket nozzle.
area is inversely propportional to the ratio v/ V. This quantity has also been
plotted in Fig. 3-3. There is a maximum in the curve of v/ V because at first the
velocity increases at a greater rate than the specific volume; however, in the
divergent section, the specific volume increases at a greater rate.
The minimum nozzle area is called the throat area. The ratio of the nozzle
exit area A to the throat area A is called the nozzle area expansion ratio and is
2 1
designated by the Greek letter E. It is an important nozzle design parameter.
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 57
The maximum gas flow per unit area occurs at the throat where there is a
unique gas pressure ratio which is only a function of the ratio of specific
heats k. This pressure ratio is found by setting M = 1 in Eq. 3-13.
PtlP1 = [2/(k + I)t<k-IJ (3-20)
The throat pressure Pt for which the isentropic mass flow rate is a maximum
is called the critical pressure. Typical values of this critical pressure ratio range
between 0.53 and 0.57. The flow through a specified rocket nozzle with a given
inlet condition is less than the maximum if the pressure ratio is larger than that
given by Eq. 3-20. However, note that this ratio is not that across the entire
nozzle and that the maximum flow or choking condition (explained below) is
always established internally at the throat and not at the exit plane. The nozzle
inlet pressure is very close to the chamber stagnation pressure, except in narrow
combustion chambers where there is an appreciable drop in pressure from the
injector region to the nozzle entrance region. This is discussed in Section 3.5.
At the point of critical pressure, namely the throat, the Mach number is one
and the values of the specific volume and temperature can be obtained from
Eqs. 3-7 and 3-12.
Vt= V [(k + l)/2]11 (k-IJ (3-21)
1
(3-22)
In Eq. 3-22 the nozzle inlet temperature T is very close to the combustion
1
temperature and hence close to the nozzle flow stagnation temperature T 0. At
the critical point there is only a mild change of these properties. Take for
example a gas with k = 1.2; the critical pressure ratio is about 0.56 (which
means that Pt equals almost half of the chamber pressure p 1); the temperature
drops only slightly (Tt = 0.91 T 1), and the specific volume expands by over
60% (Vt= 1.61 V 1). From Eqs. 3-15, 3-20, and 3-22, the critical or throat
velocity vt is obtained:
(3-23)
The first version of this equation permits the throat velocity to be calculated
directly from the nozzle inlet conditions without any of the throat conditions
being known. At the nozzle throat the critical velocity is clearly also the sonic
velocity. The divergent portion of the nozzle permits further decreases in pres
sure and increases in velocity under supersonic conditions. If the nozzle is cut
off at the throat section, the exit gas velocity is sonic and the flow rate remains
58 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
a maximum. The sonic and supersonic flow condition can be attained only if
the critical pressure prevails at the throat, that is, if p 2/ p 1 is equal to or less
than the quantity defined by Eq. 3-20. There are, therefore, three different
types of nozzles: subsonic, sonic, and supersonic, and these are described in
Table 3-1.
The supersonic nozzle is the one used for rockets. It achieves a high degree
of conversion of enthalpy to kinetic energy. The ratio between the inlet and exit
pressures in all rockets is sufficiently large to induce supersonic flow. Only if
the absolute chamber pressure drops below approximately 1.78 atm will there
be subsonic flow in the divergent portion of the nozzle during sea-level opera
tion. This condition occurs for a very short time during the start and stop
transients.
The velocity of sound is equal to the propagation speed of an elastic pres
sure wave within the medium, sound being an infinitesimal pressure wave. If,
therefore, sonic velocity is reached at any point within a steady flow system, it
is impossible for a pressure disturbance to travel past the location of sonic or
supersonic flow. Thus, any partial obstruction or disturbance of the flow down
stream of the nozzle throat with sonic flow has no influence on the throat or
upstream of it, provided that the disturbance does not raise the downstream
pressure above its critical value. It is not possible to increase the throat velocity
or the flow rate in the nozzle by further lowering the exit pressure or even
evacuating the exhaust section. This important condition is often described as
choking the flow. It is always established at the throat and not the nozzle exit
plane. Choked flow through the critical section of a supersonic nozzle may be
derived from Eqs. 3-3, 3-21, and 3-23. It is equal to the mass flow at any
section within the nozzle.
TABLE 3-1. Nozzle Types
Subsonic Sonic Supersonic
Throat velocity VJ< a 1 V1 = at V1 = a 1
Exit velocity V2 < a2 V2 = v 1 V2 > Vt
Mach number M2 < I M2 = M, = 1.0 M2 > I
f!__I_< e+l)k/(k-1) f!__I_ = f!__I_ = e +I) k/(k-Il f!__I_ > e+ lr/(k-1)
Pressure ratio
P2 2 P2 P, 2 P2 2
+-
t
Shape -~
3.3. JSENTROPJC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 59
The mass flow through a rocket nozzle is therefore proportional to the throat
area At and the chamber (stagnation) pressure p 1; it is also inversely propor
tional to the square root of T /9J1 and a function of the gas properties. For a
supersonic nozzle the ratio between the throat and any downstream area at
which a pressure Px prevails can be expressed as a function of the pressure
ratio and the ratio of specific heats, by using Eqs. 3--4, 3-16, 3-21, and 3-23, as
follows:
II [1-
At Vtvx (k+ 1)1/(k-l){JJ__x)l/k kk~ {JJ__xl)(k-1)/k]
Ax = Vxvt = -2- \Pl \P (3-25)
When Px = p 2, then Ax/ At = A 2/ At = E in Eq. 3-25. For low-altitude opera
tion (sea level to about 10,000 m) the nozzle area ratios are typically between 3
and 25, depending on chamber pressure, propellant combinations, and vehicle
envelope constraints. For high altitude (JOO km or higher) area ratios are
typically between 40 and 200, but there have been some as high as 400.
Similarly, an expression for the ratio of the velocity at any point downstream
of the throat with the pressure Px, and the throat velocity may be written from
Eqs. 3-15 and 3-23:
(3-26)
These equations permit the direct determination of the velocity ratio or the
area ratio for any given pressure ratio, and vice versa, in ideal rocket nozzles.
They are plotted in Figs. 3--4 and 3-5, and these plots allow the determination
of the pressure ratios given the area or velocity ratios. When Px = p 2, Eq. 3-26
describes the velocity ratio between the nozzle exit area and the throat section.
When the exit pressure coincides with the atmospheric pressure (p 2 = p 3, see
Fig. 2-1), these equations apply for optimum nozzle expansion. For rockets
that operate at high altitudes, not too much additional exhaust velocity can be
gained by increasing the area ratio above 1000. In addition, design difficulties
and a heavy inert nozzle mass make applications above area ratios of about
350 marginal.
Appendix 2 is a table of several properties of the Earth's atmosphere with
agreed-upon standard values. It gives ambient pressure for different altitudes.
These properties can vary somewhat from day to day (primarily because of
solar activity) and between hemispheres. For example, the density of the atmo
sphere at altitudes between 200 and 3000 km can change by more than an order
of magnitude, affecting satellite drag.
60 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
30i------;----+--1r-+--------;f---+--+-+-+-+-+---+--~.c+-----1
:{25i------;----+--1------,+------1r--+--+-+-+-+
~" 20t----+--+----i,--+-----11-----+--+-+-+-+---l-------,,4---~4-.,.£1,~
lOt---+--+--l-+------11-----+---¥--+~.l"l..~-7'"+---+--+-----1
81----+--1--------1~->-
Gt--~-+--+---+------t.,C.....~;..£]1£-,~l--+-++-_::_:_.:...::.+----+---+---1
5t----+----+------.l~J..e;,...~~-+-+-+-+---1---+---+--+~
4t---+----c~-7"',j~. ...." '----,~-+--+--+--+-+-+---+--+--+---I
31--~~~;,q,,,c_1-----1-----1-
2.5 ~~"""l;.~-+--+-f-=_.j,.-r"""''F---8-.l-~-'""'T. .......' 111=!'::':::J
l'-------'-~...J...-..J'--...._~..._....L.........J........J.......L.....L....J.~~....L....~......___.____.
10 15 20 25 30 40 50 60 80 100 150 200 300
P IP.
1
FIGURE 3-4. Area and velocity ratios as function of pressure ratio for the diverging
section of a supersonic nozzle.
Example 3-3. Design a nozzle for an ideal rocket that has to operate at 25 km altitude
and give 5000 N thrust at a chamber pressure of 2.068 MPa and a chamber temperature
of 2800 K. Assuming that k = 1.30 and R = 355.4 J/kg-K, determine the throat area,
exit area, throat velocity, and exit temperature.
SOLUTION. At 25 km the atmospheric pressure equals 0.002549 MPa (in Appendix 2
the ratio is 0.025158 which must be multiplied by the pressure at sea level or 0.1013
MPa). The pressure ratio is
P2IP1 = p 3/p1 = 0.002549/2.068 = 0.001232 = 1/811.3
The critical pressure, from Eq. 3-20, is
p, = 0.546 x 2.068 = 1.129 MPa
The throat velocity, from Eq. 3-23, is
2 X J.30
--_-+-l 355.4 x 2800 == 1060 m/sec
13
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 61
600
LI
500 )/' .
I,
400 V ll"
.. .__o/ I/ i..,, I,
300 ~~."...- :., .. V "" 1.,"'
250 /.,,. .__'),o V / V
·o ,.,,~ I/
200
"~ /~~jY~ ~I,,
I/
150 / VV/ i}/
VV/ V
f--. .. .// .. .,,. / ...... I/ ... ./
80
_; V ./ V ',/
.v
/ / V/
60
/;r.,; V V
50 / /
/' / / _.....,,, / --~ ---
40 ---·- 4
V' V /- -" Velocity ratio k= 1.10
l......t" ~ ..,. ~ ,, 7"~ - - - -- --1---
23 50 ,~, . /
-~
--- -- -- --- ~-- l_.3Q
~ ~
.._
~ ~ - _.1j..4_0
20 2
V
15
300 500 1000 2000 3000 5000 10,000
P/P..
FIGURE 3-5. Continuation of prior figure of area ratios and velocity ratios, but for
higher pressure ratios in a supersonic nozzle.
The ideal exit velocity is found from Eq. 3-16 or Fig. 3-5, using a pressure ratio of
811.3:
02)(k-l)/k]
2k [
--RT I- -
k- I 1 1
= J2 X J.30 355.4 x 2800 x 0.7869 = 2605 m/sec
I. 30 - I
An approximate value of this velocity can also be obtained from the throat velocity and
Fig. 3-4. The ideal propellant consumption for optimum expansion conditions is
m= F /v = 5000/2605 = 1.919 kg/ sec
2
The specific volume at the entrance to the nozzle equals
V1 = RTifP 1 = 355.4 x 2800/(2.068 x 106 ) = 0.481 m3 /kg
62 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
At the throat and exit sections the specific volumes are obtained from Eqs. 3-21 and
3-7:
Vt= Vi (-k + 2- I) i/(k-i) = 0.481 (2 2. 3) i;o.3 = 0.766 m 3 /kg
(I!_ )
V2 =Vi~: i;k = 0.481(2.068/0.002549)07692 = 83.15 m3 /kg
The areas at the throat and exit sections and the nozzle area ratio A2/ At are
At= rhVtfvt = 1.919 x 0.766/1060 = 13.87 cm2
A2 = rhV2/v2 = 1.919 x 83.15/2605 = 612.5 cm2
E = A2/At = 612.5/13.87 = 44.16
An approximate value of this area ratio can also be obtained directly from Fig. 3-5 for
k = 1.30 and p 1 / p 2 = 811.2. The exit temperature is given by
T2 = Ti(p2/pdk-l)/k = 2800(0.002549/2.068)02307 = 597 K
Thrust and Thrust Coefficient
The efflux of the propellant gases or the momentum flux-out causes the thrust
or reaction force on the rocket structure. Because the flow is supersonic, the
pressure at the exit plane of the nozzle may be different from the ambient
pressure and the pressure thrust component adds to the momentum thrust as
given by Eq. 2-14:
(2-14)
The maximum thrust for any given nozzle operation is found in a vacuum
where p = 0. Between sea level and the vacuum of space, Eq. 2-14 gives the
3
variation of thrust with altitude, using the properties of the atmosphere such as
those listed in Appendix 2. Figure 2-2 shows a typical variation of thrust with
altitude. To modify values calculated for optimum operating conditions
(p 2 = p 3) for given values of Pr, k, and A 2/ A 1, the following expressions may
be used. For the thrust,
0 p3)
2 AA2 (3-27)
F=Fopt+PrAt ---
r Pr r
For the specific impulse, using Eqs. 2-5, 2-18, and 2-14,
(3-28)
3.3. ISENTROPJC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 63
If, for example, the specific impulse for a new exit pressure p corresponding to
2
a new area ratio A 2/ At is to be calculated, the above relations may be used.
Equation 2-14 can be expanded by modifying it and substituting v 2, vt and
Vt from Eqs. 3-16, 3-21, and 3-23.
G
(3-29)
2k2 ( 2 )(k+I)/(k-I) [ 2)(k-I)/k]
-- -- 1- - +(p2 -p3)A2
k-1 k+I I
The first version of this equation is general and applies to all rockets, the
second form applies to an ideal rocket with k being constant throughout the
expansion process. This equation shows that the thrust is proportional to the
throat area At and the chamber pressure (or the nozzle inlet pressure) PI and is
a function of the pressure ratio across the nozzle piJp 2, the specific heat ratio k,
and of the pressure thrust. It is called the ideal thrust equation. The thrust
coefficient CF is defined as the thrust divided by the chamber pressure PI and
the throat area At. Equations 2-14, 3-21, and 3-16 then give
G
(3-30)
_2k _2 ( _2_ ) (k+I)/(k-I) [ l _ P2 )(k-I)/k] + P2 - p3 ~A
k - 1 k + I I PI At
The thrust coefficient CF is a function of gas property k, the nozzle area ratio E,
and the pressure ratio across the nozzle piJp 2, but independent of chamber
temperature. For any fixed pressure ratio piJp 3, the thrust coefficient CF and
the thrust F have a peak when p = P3· This peak value is known as the
2
optimum thrust coefficient and is an important criterion in nozzle design con
siderations. The use of the thrust coefficient permits a simplification to
Eq. 3-29:
(3-31)
Equation 3-31 can be solved for CF and provides the relation for determining
the thrust coefficient experimentally from measured values of chamber pres
sure, throat diameter, and thrust. Even though the thrust coefficient is a func
tion of chamber pressure, it is not simply proportional to PI, as can be seen
from Eq. 3-30. However, it is directly proportional to throat area. The thrust
coefficient can be thought of as representing the amplification of thrust due to
the gas expanding in the supersonic nozzle as compared to the thrust that
would be exerted if the chamber pressure acted over the throat area only.
64 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
The thrust coefficient has values ranging from about 0.8 to 1.9. It is a con
venient parameter for seeing the effects of chamber pressure or altitude varia
tions in a given nozzle configuration, or to correct sea-level results for flight
altitude conditions.
Figure 3-6 shows the variation of the optimum expansion (p 2 = p 3) thrust
coefficient for different pressure ratios PI /p 2, values of k, and area ratio E. The
complete thrust coefficient is plotted in Figs 3-7 and 3-8 as a function of
pressure ratio pifp and area ratio for k = 1.20 and 1.30. These two sets of
3
curves are useful in solving various nozzle problems for they permit the eva
luation of under- and over-expanded nozzle operation, as explained below. The
values given in these figures are ideal and do not consider such losses as
divergence, friction or internal expansion waves.
WhenpI/p becomes very large (e.g., expansion into near-vacuum), then the
3
thrust coefficient approaches an asymptotic maximum as shown in Figs. 3-7
and 3-8. These figures also give values of CF for any mismatched nozzle
(p 2 -f p 3), provided the nozzle is flowing full at all times, that is, the working
fluid does not separate or break away from the walls. Flow separation is
discussed later in this section.
Characteristic Velocity and Specific Impulse
The characteristic velocity c* was defined by Eq. 2-18. From Eqs. 3-24 and
3-31 it can be shown that
* PIA 1 !,go c --==J=kR=T=I === (3-32)
C -- - riz- -- -
CF
-- -
CF
--
kJ[2/(k
+
I)]<k+I)/(k-1)
It is basically a function of the propellant characteristics and combustion
chamber design; it is independent of nozzle characteristics. Thus, it can be
used as a figure of merit in comparing propellant combinations and combus
tion chamber designs. The first version of this equation is general and allows
the determination of c* from experimental data of riz, PI, and A The last
1•
version gives the maximum value of c* as a function of gas properties, namely
k, the chamber temperature, and the molecular mass fill, as determined from
the theory in Chapter 5. Some values of c* are shown in Tables 5-4 and 5-5.
The term c* -efficiency is sometimes used to express the degree of completion of
the energy release and the creation of high temperature, high pressure gas in
the chamber. It is the ratio of the actual value of c*, as determined from
measurements, and the theoretical value (last part of Eq. 3-32), and typically
has a value between 92 and 99.5 percent.
Using Eqs. 3-31 and 3-32, the thrust itself may now be expressed as the
mass flow rate times a function of the combustion chamber (c*) times a func
tion of the nozzle expansion CF),
2.3
lo
...
.1
2.2 Ji::::\-~ t;:; ~
L,....,"...-
~i--
2.1
'--"'
~
2.0 120
1--.....
,,,........ K 1...---i.,.., ~ --- i----L--~. .......
~ 1~ ........
1.9 k K -"" I'--"' b ~~ ---- ~ ,-- 1.I 30
1.8 ,,; f'--._ --t,..... ~ ____-,: Is. I I
[>. i:::,.. E "" I I
'~~ l.--: -~ k:-" [~ ::::.. k: ~~ I'---.. 1.40
1.7
/' K i I':/ : .,... .... ~ D -< -- > ~2I" 0--- E:30 ... E_ -40~ E =5E 0- 60 E 100
1.6
;/ t::: t:::. .....
~
~ ~ t:;;., ,. ..... i.,.., ""' :~=10
1.5 ~
~ ~ t..,,,," E:5
/
1.4
i:;.,,<E:3
~
1.3
~
1.2
10 20 50 100 200 500 1000 2000 5000 10,000
FIGURE 3-6. Thrust coefficient Cp as a function of pressure ratio, nozzle area ratio, and specific heat ratio for
(a J, I optimum expansion conditions (p 2 = p 3).
a,
a,
0.6~~----..__~...._. ........ ___.~...._ .................................................................
~~--'-~-'-~....L...--1...---L-'-......L.....L...L-L...L..J.....L..I...L.LU
1 2 4 6 8 10 20 40 60 80 100
Area ratio E = A 21At
FIGURE '3-7. Thrust coefficient CF versus nozzle area ratio fork= 1.20.
2.0
I
k= 1.30
I
'i1
964 ~
· um value == ·
1.8
Line of optimum -
1--P--I 1- ~c -t)_ N1a1<. -1m - -H-, r
- thrust coefficient --- -- - -'- 1000
--
P2 p3 -r- --- -t--,....._'"."... ~ S()(J ~
-~-
1.6
I\ .......-::: - ~ i::;;. 1..- ~ ~-'-_~ < ~~ 1 -~~ 3a~ . ~
t ~
-~ "i:::::: --
.
,, -V - ... ,.._
~-
---
1.4 ,., / aa~~
~ ~ >- ~ 1,-t.-1,
c3' / - ,;. ~J., I
~ /
12 V v" I V I" l' O:-- .. . o /- / I/' Region of flow separation _
for conical and bell
/ shaped nozzles
......
/ ............. /
/
I S.o
1.0
/
~ /
r-.... /
"'·.37
~ I
0.8 <s I
I
I
--?.o ...
0.6
1 2 4 6 8 10 20 40 60 80 100
=
Area ratio E A 2/A,
FIGURE 3-8. Thrust coefficient CF versus nozzle area ratio fork= 1.30.
68 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
(3-33)
Some authors use a term called the discharge coefficient CD which is merely the
reciprocal of c*. Both CD and the characteristic exhaust velocity c* are used
primarily with chemical rocket propulsion systems.
The influence of variations in the specific heat ratio k on various parameters
(such as c, c* A 2/ A 1, v 2/v 1, or ls) is not as large as the changes in chamber
temperature, pressure ratio, or molecular mass. Nevertheless, it is a noticeable
factor, as can be seen by examining Figs. 3-2 and 3-4 to 3-8. The value of k is
1.67 for monatomic gases such as helium and argon, 1.4 for cold diatomic gases
such as hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, and for triatomic and beyond it varies
between I.I and 1.3 (methane is I.I I and ammonia and carbon dioxide 1.33).
In general, the more complex the molecule the lower the value of k; this is also
true for molecules at high temperatures when their vibrational modes have
been activated. The average values of k and \In for typical rocket exhaust
gases with several constituents depend strongly on the composition of the
products of combustion (chemical constituents and concentrations), as
explained in Chapter 5. Values of k and \In are given in Tables 5-4, 5-5, and
5-6.
Example 3-4. What is percentage variation in thrust between sea level and 25 km for a
rocket having a chamber pressure of 20 atm and an expansion area ratio of 6? (Use
k = 1.30.)
SOLUTION. At sea level: p /p = 20/1.0 = 20; at 25 km: p /p = 20/0.0251 = 754
1 3 1 3
(see Appendix 2).
Use Eq. 3-30 or Fig. 3-8 to determine the thrust coefficient (hint: use a vertical line on
Fig. 3-8 corresponding to A 2/ A,= 6.0). At sea level: CF= 1.33. At 25 km: CF= 1.64.
The thrust increase= (1.64 - l.33)/1.33 = 23%.
Under- and Over-Expanded Nozzles
An under-expanded nozzle discharges the fluid at an exit pressure greater than
the external pressure because the exit area is too small for an optimum area
ratio. The expansion of the fluid is therefore incomplete within the nozzle, and
must take place outside. The nozzle exit pressure is higher than the local atmo
spheric pressure.
In an over-expanded nozzle the fluid attains a lower exit pressure than the
atmosphere as it has an exit area too large for optimum. The phenomenon of
over-expansion for a supersonic nozzle is shown in Fig. 3-9, with typical
pressure measurements of superheated steam along the nozzle axis and differ
ent back pressures or pressure ratios. Curve AB shows the variation of pressure
with the optimum back pressure corresponding to the area ratio. Curves AC
and AD show the variation of pressure along the axis for increasingly higher
external pressures. The expansion within the nozzle proceeds normally for the
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 69
Gil
F'
I
I
: Supersonic flow
E : downstream of throat;
: jet separation and internal
: oblique shocks inside
D il diverging section
I
c:I
s:I
Optimum expansion
I
Distance along nozzle axis
LExternal
expansion waves
at high altitude
FIGURE 3--9. Distribution of pressures in a converging-diverging nozzle for different
flow conditions. Inlet pressure is the same, but exit pressure changes. Based on experi
mental data from A. Stodala.
initial portion of the nozzle. At point I on curve AD, for example, the pressure
is lower than the exit pressure and a sudden rise in pressure takes place which is
accompanied by the separation of the flow from the walls (separation is
described later).
The non-ideal behavior of nozzles is strongly influenced by the presence of
compression waves or shock waves inside the diverging nozzle section, which
are strong compression discontinuities and exist only in supersonic flow. The
sudden pressure rise in the curve ID is such a compression wave. Expansion
waves, also strictly supersonic phenomena, match the flow from a nozzle exit to
lower ambient pressures. Compression and expansion waves are described in
Chapter 18.
The different possible flow conditions in a supersonic nozzle are as follows:
l. When the external pressure P3 is below the nozzle exit pressure p 2, the
nozzle will flow full but will have external expansion waves at its exit (i.e.,
under-expansion). The expansion of the gas inside the nozzle is incom
plete and the value of CF and Is, will be less than at optimum expansion.
70 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
2. For external pressures P3 slightly higher than the nozzle exit pressure p 2,
the nozzle will continue to flow full. This occurs until p reaches a value
2
between about 25 and 40% of p 3• The expansion is somewhat inefficient
and CF and ls will have lower values than an optimum nozzle would
have. Shock waves will exist outside the nozzle exit section.
3. For higher external pressures, separation of the flow will take place inside
the divergent portion of the nozzle. The diameter of the supersonic jet
will be smaller than the nozzle exit diameter. With steady flow, separa
tion is typically axially symmetric. Figs. 3-10 and 3-11 show diagrams of
separated flows. The axial location of the separation plane depends on
the local pressure and the wall contour. The point of separation travels
downstream with decreasing external pressure. At the nozzle exit the flow
in the center portion remains supersonic, but is surrounded by an annular
shaped section of subsonic flow. There is a discontinuity at the separation
location and the thrust is reduced, compared to a nozzle that would have
been cut off at the separation plane. Shock waves exist outside the nozzle
in the external plume.
4. For nozzles in which the exit pressure is just below the value of the inlet
pressure, the pressure ratio is below the critical pressure ratio (as defined
by Eq. 3-20) and subsonic flow prevails throughout the entire nozzle.
This condition occurs normally in rocket nozzles for a short time during
the start and stop transients.
The method for estimating pressure at the location of the separation plane
inside the diverging section of a supersonic nozzle has usually been empirical.
Reference 3--4 shows separation regions based on collected data for several
dozen actual conical and bell-shaped nozzles during separation. Reference
3-5 describes a variety of nozzles, their behavior, and methods used to estimate
the location and the pressure at separation. Actual values of pressure for the
over-expanded and under-expanded regimes described above are functions of
the specific heat ratio and the area ratio (see Ref. 3-1).
The axial thrust direction is not usually altered by separation, because a
steady flow usually separates uniformly over a cross-section in a divergent
nozzle cone of conventional rocket design. During transients, such as start
and stop, the separation may not be axially symmetric and may cause momen
tary but large side forces on the nozzle. During a normal sea-level transient of a
large rocket nozzle (before the chamber pressure reaches its full value) some
momentary flow oscillations and non-symmetric separation of the jet can occur
during over-expanded flow operation. Reference 3--4 shows that the magnitude
and direction of transient side forces can change rapidly and erratically. The
resulting side forces can be large and have caused failures of nozzle exit cone
structures and thrust vector control gimbal actuators. References 3-5 and 3-6
discuss techniques for estimating these side forces.
When the flow separates, as it does in a highly over-expanded nozzle, the
thrust coefficient CF can be estimated if the point of separation in the nozzle is
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 71
known. Thus, CF can be determined for an equivalent smaller nozzle with an
exit area equal to that at the point of separation. The effect of separation is to
increase the thrust and the thrust coefficient over the value that they would
have if separation had not occurred. Thus, with separated gas flow, a nozzle
designed for high altitude (large value of E) would have a larger thrust at sea
level than expected, but not as good as an optimum nozzle; in this case separa
tion may actually be desirable. With separated flow a large and usually heavy
portion of the nozzle is not utilized and the nozzle is bulkier and longer than
necessary. The added engine weight and size decrease flight performance.
Designers therefore select an area ratio that will not cause separation.
Because of uneven flow separation and potentially destructive side loads,
sea-level static tests of an upper stage or a space propulsion system with a high
area ratio over-expanded nozzle are usually avoided; instead, a sea-level test
nozzle with a much smaller area ratio is substituted. However, actual and
simulated altitude testing (in an altitude test facility similar to the one described
in Chapter 20) would be done with a nozzle having the correct large area ratio.
The ideal solution that avoids separation at low altitudes and has high values
of CF at high altitudes is a nozzle that changes area ratio in flight. This is
discussed at the end of this section.
For most applications, the rocket system has to operate over a range of
altitudes; for a fixed chamber pressure this implies a range of nozzle pressure
ratios. The condition of optimum expansion (p 2 = p 3) occurs only at one alti
tude, and a nozzle with a fixed area ratio is therefore operating much of the
time at either over-expanded or under-expanded conditions. The best nozzle
for such an application is not necessarily one that gives optimum nozzle gas
expansion, but one that gives the largest vehicle flight performance (say, total
impulse, or specific impulse, or range, or payload); it can often be related to a
time average over the powered flight trajectory.
Example 3-5. Use the data from Example 3-4 (p 1 = 20 atm, E = 6.0, k = 1.30) but
instead use an area ratio of 15. Compare the altitude performance of the two nozzles
with different E by plotting their CF against altitude. Assume no shocks inside the
nozzle.
SOLUTION. For the E = 15 case, the optimum pressure ratio pifp 3 = pifp 2, and from
Fig. 3-6 or 3-8 this value is about 180;p = 20/180 = 0.111 atm, which occurs at about
3
1400 m altitude. Below this altitude the nozzle is over-expanded. At sea level, pifp = 20
3
and p = I atm. As shown in Fig. 3-10, separation would occur. From other similar
3
nozzles it is estimated that separation will occur approximately at a cross-section where
the total pressure is about 40% of p 3, or 0.4 atm. The nozzle would not flow full below
an area ratio of about 6 or 7 and the gas jet would only be in the center of the exit area.
Weak shock waves and jet contraction would then raise the exhaust jet's pressure to
match the one atmosphere external pressure. If the jet had not separated, it would have
reached an exit pressure of 0.11 atm, but this is an unstable condition that could not
be maintained at sea level. As the vehicle gains altitude, the separation plane would
72 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
Continuously variable nozzle
1.8 area ratio
:.::::.------------€=
15.0
1.7
1.6 -------------E = 6.0
1.5
1.4
~
Exitplanel
1.3
Exhaust plume at sea level
1.2
Contour of
1.1
---------- plume at about
- .......- -...1 _ _ _ 3000m altitude
L
1.0
Separation p~ Contour at
about 7000m
0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000
Altitude, m
FIGURE 3--10. Thrust coefficient CF for two nozzles with different area ratios. One has
jet separation below about 7000 m altitude. The fully expanded exhaust plume is not
shown in the sketch.
gradually move downstream until, at an altitude of about 7000 m, the exhaust gases
would occupy the full nozzle area.
The values of CF can be obtained by following a vertical line for E = 15 and E = 6
in Fig. 3-8 for different pressure ratios, which correspond to different altitudes.
Alternatively, Eq. 3-30 can be used for better accuracy. Results are similar to those
plotted in Fig. 3-10. The lower area ratio of 6 gives a higher CF at low altitudes, but
is inferior at the higher altitudes. The larger nozzle gives a higher CF at higher
altitudes.
Figure 3-11 shows a comparison of altitude and sea-level behavior of three
nozzles and their plumes at different area ratios for a typical three-stage satel
lite launch vehicle. When fired at sea-level conditions, the nozzle of the third
stage with the highest area ratio will experience flow separation and suffer a
major performance loss; the second stage will flow full but the external plume
will contrast; since p < p there is a loss in ls and F. There is no effect on the
2 3
first stage nozzle.
Example 3-6. A rocket engine test gives the following data: thrust F = 53,000 !bf,
m
propellant flow = 208 lbm/sec, nozzle exit area ratio A 2/ A 1 = 10.0, atmospheric
3.3. ISENTROPIC FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES 73
During flight During sealevel static tests
Stage A2!At h(km) ls (sec) h(km) ls (sec)
ceE
Booster
or first 6 0 267 ~ 0 267
stage
Nozzle flows full, Nozzle flows full
slight underexpansion
,::J;
<I=
Second
stage 10 24 312 0 254
Overexpansion,
slight contraction
-
<= /
Third ~
stage 40 ----.... 100 334 0 245
"'
Un derexpans1on
Flow separation
caused by
overexpansion
FIGURE 3-11. Simplified sketches of exhaust gas behavior of three typical rocket
nozzles for a three-stage launch vehicle. The first vehicle stage has the biggest chamber
and the highest thrust but the lowest nozzle area ratio, and the top or third stage usually
has the lower thrust but the highest nozzle area ratio.
pressure at test station (the nozzle flows full) p = 13.8 psia, and chamber pressure
3
p = 620 psia. The test engineer also knows that the theoretical specific impulse is
1
289 sec at the standard reference conditions of p = 1000 psia and p = 14.7 psia,
1 3
and that k = 1.20. Correct the value of the thrust to sea-level expansion and the
specific impulse corresponding. Assume the combustion temperature and k do not
vary significantly with chamber pressure; this is realistic for certain propellants.
SOLUTION. The actual pressure ratio was p /p = 620/13.8 = 44.9; the ideal pres
1 3
sure ratio at standard conditions would have been equal to 1000/14.7 = 68.0 and the
actual pressure ratio for expansion to sea level would have been 620/14.7 = 42.1. The
thrust coefficient for the test conditions is obtained from Fig. 3-7 or from Eq. 3-30 as
CF= 1.52 (for pifp 3 = 44.9, E = 10 and k = 1.20). The thrust coefficient for the cor
rected sea-level conditions is similarly found to be 1.60. The thrust at sea level would
have been F = 53,000 (1.60/1.52) = 55,790 !bf. The specific impulse would have been
ls = F /w = 53,000/208(1.60/ 1.52) = 268 sec
74 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
The specific impulse can be corrected in proportion to the thrust coefficient because
k, T, and therefore c* do not vary with p 1; /
5
is proportional to c if mr emains constant.
The theoretical specific impulse is given for optimum expansion, i.e., for a nozzle area
ratio other than 10.0. From Fig. 3-6 or 3-7 and for p /p = 68.0 the thrust coefficient is
1 2
1.60 and its optimum area ratio approximately 9.0. The corrected specific impulse is
accordingly 255 (1.60/ 1.51) = 270 sec. In comparison with the theoretical specific
impulse of 289 sec, this rocket has achieved 270/289 or 93.5% of its maximum
performance.
Figs. 3-10 and 3-11 suggest that an ideal design for an ascending (e .g.,
launch) rocket vehicle would have a "rubber-like" diverging section that
could be lengthened so that the nozzle exit area could be made larger as the
ambient pressure is reduced. The design would then allow the rocket vehicle to
attain its maximum performance at all altitudes as it ascends. As yet we have
not achieved a simple mechanical hardware design with this full altitude com
pensation similar to "stretching rubber." However, there are a number of
practical nozzle configurations that can be used to alter the flow shape with
altitude and obtain maximum performance. They are discussed in the next
section.
Influence of Chamber Geometry
When the chamber has a cross section that is larger than about four times the
throat area (Aif A
1
> 4), the chamber velocity v 1, can be neglected, as was
mentioned in explaining Eqs. 3-15 and 3-16. However, vehicle space or weight
constraints often require smaller thrust chamber areas for liquid propellant
engines and grain design considerations lead to small void volumes or small
perforations or port areas for solid propellant motors. Then v can no longer
1
be neglected as a contribution to the performance. The gases in the chamber
expand as heat is being added. The energy necessary to accelerate these
expanding gases within the chamber will also cause a pressure drop and an
additional energy loss. This acceleration process in the chamber is adiabatic
(no heat transfer) but not isentropic. This loss is a maximum when the chamber
diameter is equal to the nozzle diameter, which means that there is no conver
ging nozzle section. This has been called a throatless rocket motor and has been
used in a few tactical missile booster applications, where there was a premium
on minimum inert mass and length. The flight performance improvement due
to inert mass savings supposedly outweighs the nozzle performance loss of a
throatless motor. Table 3-2 lists some of the performance penalties for three
chamber area ratios.
Because of this pressure drop within narrow chambers, the chamber pres
sure is lower at the nozzle entrance than it would be if A 1/ A
1
had been larger.
This causes a small loss in thrust and specific impulse. The theory of this loss is
given in Ref. 3-7.
3.4. NOZZLE CONFIGURATIONS 75
TABLE 3-2. Estimated Losses for Small-Diameter Chambers
Specific
Throat Thrust Impulse
Chamber-to-Throat Pressure Reduction Reduction
Area Ratio (%) (%) (%)
00 100 0 0
3.5 99 1.5 0.31
2.0 96 5.0 0.55
1.0 81 19.5 1.34
k = 1.20; P1IP2 = 1000.
3.4. NOZZLE CONFIGURATIONS
A number of different proven nozzle configurations are available today. This
section describes their geometries and performance. Other chapters (6, 8, 11,
14, and 16) discuss their materials, heat transfer, or application, and mention
their requirements, design, construction, and thrust vector control. Nozzles
and chambers are usually of circular cross section and have a converging
section, a throat at the narrowest location (minimum cross section), and a
diverging section. Nozzles can be seen in Figs. 1-4, 1-5, 1-8, 2-1, 3-11 to 3-
13, 3-15, 10-2 to 10-5, 10-16, 11-1 to 11-3, and 14-6 to 14-8. Refs. 3-5 and
3-8 describe many nozzle configurations.
The converging nozzle section between the chamber and the nozzle throat has
never been critical in achieving high performance. The subsonic flow in this
section can easily be turned at very low pressure drop and any radius, cone
angle, wall contour curve, or nozzle inlet shape is satisfactory. A few small
attitude control thrust chambers have had their nozzle at 90 degrees from the
combustion chamber axis without any performance loss. The throat contour
also is not very critical to performance, and any radius or other curve is usually
acceptable. The pressure gradients are high in these two regions and the flow
will adhere to the walls. The principal difference in the different nozzle con
figurations is found in the diverging supersonic-flow section, as described
below. The wall surface throughout the nozzle should be smooth and shiny
to minimize friction, radiation absorption, and convective heat transfer due to
surface roughness. Gaps, holes, sharp edges, or protrusions must be avoided.
Six different nozzle configurations are shown in Fig. 3-12 and each will be
discussed. The first three sketches show conical and bell-shaped nozzles. The
other three have a center body inside the nozzle and have excellent altitude
compensation. Although these last three have been ground tested, to date none
of them has flown in a space launch vehicle. The lengths of several nozzle types
are compared in Fig. 3-13. The objectives of a good nozzle configuration are to
obtain the highest practical ls, minimize inert nozzle mass, and conserve length
Cone Contoured or Contoured or Plug or Plug or Expansion
(15° half angle) bell-full length bell shape, aerospike full aerospike, -deflection
shortened length truncated or cut off
LJt
Shape
Flow
with
underexpansion
at altitude
Flow
with
overexpansion
(sea level)
Mass flow Alt~.:::I
distribution ~ ~(-~) {
at exit or tip
FIGURE 3-12. Simplified diagrams of several different nozzle configurations and their flow effects.
3.4. NOZZLE CONFIGURATIONS 77
20
~
~
~
E 15
'-" c'
"'
0
£
.B
-4 10
.s:;
bO
C:
~
;:C;l;)
N
..0 C. .: 5
0
~
a"::'
00 10 30 40
FIGURE 3-13. Length comparison of several types of nozzles. (Taken in part from G.
V. R. Rao, "Recent Developments in Rocket Nozzle Configurations," American Rocket
Society Journal, Vol. 31, No. 11, November 1961.)
(shorter nozzles can reduce vehicle length, vehicle structure, and vehicle inert
mass).
Cone- and Bell-Shaped Nozzles
The conical nozzle is the oldest and perhaps the simplest configuration. It is
relatively easy to fabricate and is still used today in many small nozzles. A
theoretical correction factor ..1. can be applied to the nozzle exit momentum of
an ideal rocket with a conical nozzle exhaust. This factor is the ratio between
the momentum of the gases in a nozzle with a finite nozzle angle 2a and the
momentum of an ideal nozzle with all gases flowing in an axial direction:
1
..1. = 2(1 + cosa) (3-34)
The variation of ..1. with different values of a is shown in Table 3-3 for any
nozzle that has uniform mass flow per unit exit area. For ideal rockets ..1. = 1.0.
For a rocket nozzle with a divergence cone angle of 30° (half angle a= 15°),
the exit momentum and therefore the exhaust velocity will be 98.3% of the
velocity calculated by Eq. 3-l 5b. Note that the correction factor ..1. only applies
78 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
TABLE 3-3. Nozzle Angle Correction Factor for Conical Nozzles
Nozzle Cone Divergence
Half Angle, a (d eg) Correction Factor, A
0 1.0000
2 0.9997
4 0.9988
6 0.9972
8 0.9951
10 0.9924
12 0.9890
14 0.9851
15 0.9830
16 0.9806
18 0.9755
20 0.9698
22 0.9636
24 0.9567
to the first term (the momentum thrust) in Eqs. 2-14, 3-29, and 3-30 and not to
the second term (pressure thrust).
A small nozzle divergence angle causes most of the momentum to be axial
and thus gives a high specific impulse, but the long nozzle has a penalty in
rocket propulsion system mass, vehicle mass, and also design complexity. A
large divergence angle gives short, lightweight designs, but the performance is
low. There is an optimum conical nozzle shape and length (typically between 12
and 18 degrees half angle) and it is usually a compromise which depends on the
specific application and flight path.
The bell-shaped or contour nozzle (see Figs. 3-12 and 3-13) is probably the
most common nozzle shape today. It has a high angle expansion section (20 to
50°) right behind the nozzle throat; this is followed by a gradual reversal of
nozzle contour slope so that at the nozzle exit the divergence angle is small,
usually less than a I 0° half angle. It is possible to go to large divergence angles
immediately behind the throat (20 to 50°) because the high relative pressure,
the large pressure gradient, and the rapid expansion of the working fluid do not
allow separation in this region unless there are discontinuities in the nozzle
contour. The expansion in the supersonic bell nozzle is more efficient than in a
simple straight cone of similar area ratio and length, because the wall contour
is designed to minimize losses, as explained later in this section. For the past
several decades most of the nozzles have been bell shaped.
A change of flow direction of a supersonic gas in an expanding wall geo
metry can only be achieved through expansion waves. An expansion wave
occurs at a thin surface, where the flow velocity increases and changes its
flow direction slightly, and where the pressure and temperature drop. These
3.4. NOZZLE CONFIGURATIONS 79
wave surfaces are at an oblique angle to the flow. As the gas passes through the
throat, it undergoes a series of these expansion waves with essentially no loss of
energy. In the bell-shaped nozzle shown in Fig. 3-14 these expansions occur
internally in the flow between the throat and the inflection location /; the area
is steadily increasing like a flare on a trumpet. The contour angle 8; is a max
imum at the inflection location. Between the inflection point I and the nozzle
exit Ethe flow area is still increasing, but at a diminishing rate, allowing further
gas expansion and additional expansion waves. However, the contour of the
nozzle wall is different and the change in cross-sectional area per unit length is
decreasing. The purpose of this last segment of the contoured nozzle is to have
a low divergence loss as the gas leaves the nozzle exit plane. The angle at the
exit 8e is small, usually less than 10°. The difference between 8; and 8e is called
the turn-back angle. When the gas flow is turned in the opposite direction
(between points I and E) oblique compression waves will occur. These com
pression waves are thin surfaces where the flow undergoes a mild shock, the
flow is turned, and the velocity is actually reduced slightly. Each of these
multiple compression waves causes a small energy loss. By carefully determin
ing the wall contour (by an analysis that uses a mathematical tool called the
method of characteristics), it is possible to balance the oblique expansion waves
with the oblique compression waves and minimize the energy loss. The analysis
leading to the nozzle contour is presented in Chapter 20.33 of Ref. 3-3 and also
in Refs. 3-8 to 3-11; it is based on supersonic aerodynamic flow, the method of
characteristics (Ref. 3-1 ), and the properties of the expanding gas. Most of the
rocket organizations have computer codes for this analysis. The radius of
curvature or the contour shape at the throat region have an influence on the
contour of the diverging bell-shaped nozzle section.
The length of a bell nozzle is usually given a fraction of the length of a
reference conical nozzle with a 15° half angle. An 80% bell nozzle has a length
(distance between throat plane and exit plane) that is 20% shorter than a
comparable 15° cone of the same area ratio. Ref. 3-9 shows the original pre
sentation by Rao of the method of characteristics applied to shorter bell noz
zles. He also determined that a parabola was a good approximation for the
bell-shaped contour curve (Ref. 3-3, Section 20.33), and parabolas have actu
ally been used in some nozzle designs. The top part of Fig. 3-14 shows that the
parabola is tangent (8;) at point I and has an exit angle (8e) at point E and a
length L that has to be corrected for the curve TI. These conditions allow the
parabola to be determined by simple geometric analysis or geometric drawing.
A throat approach radius of 1.5 rt and a throat expansion radius of 0.4 rt were
used. If somewhat different radii had been used, the results would have been
only slightly different. The middle set of curves gives the relation between
length, area ratio, and the two angles of the bell contour. The bottom set of
curves gives the correction factors, equivalent to the A factor for conical noz
zles, which are to be applied to the thrust coefficient or the exhaust velocity,
provided the nozzles are at optimum expansions, that is, p 2 = p 3.
80 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
Nozzle
r2 = 5.00
throat
r2-r1
L =--
cone tan(}
(IS 40
0~
. l0 !! 0)
0)
a(IS ."~O
30
- 0)
-~ 0)
;t::: C
.!: (IS
i,- 20
o(IS ~ 20
.0 0)
(IS 0)
~"O
<IS~
a. 0) 10
<ii 0)
cc
.;:::.: , ctS
<:l:) 0
Expansion area ratio E
100
Bell nozzles
0
t, 99
.l!!
C
·0u
98
~
0
() 97
0)
N
N
z0
96
70 80 90 100
Percent of length of a 15 deg half-angle
conical nozzle with same area as bell shape
3.4. NOZZLE CONFIGURATIONS 81
TABLE 3--4. Data on Several Bell-Shaped Nozzles
Area Ratio IO 25 50
Cone (15° Half Angle)
Length (IOO%t 8.07 14.93 22.66
Correction factor A 0.9829 0.9829 0.9829
80% Bell Contour
Lengtha 6.45 11.94 18.12
Correction factor A 0.985 0.987 0.988
Approximate half angle at inflection point and exit 25/10 30/8 32/7.5
(degrees)
60% Bell Contour
Length a 4.84 9.96 13.59
Correction factor A 0.961 0.968 0.974
Approximate half angle at inflection point and exit 32.5/17 36/14 39/18
(degrees)
aThe length is given in dimensionless fom1 as a multiple of the throat radius, which is one.
Table 3-4 shows data for parabolas developed from this figure, which allow
the reader to apply this method and check the results. The table shows two
shortened bell nozzles and a conical nozzle, each for three area ratios. It can be
seen that as the length has been decreased, the losses are higher for the shorter
length and slightly higher for small nozzle area ratios. A 1% improvement in
the correction factor gives about 1% more specific impulse (or thrust) and this
difference can be significant in many applications. The reduced length is an
important benefit, and it is usually reflected in an improvement of the vehicle
mass ratio. The table and Fig. 3-14 show that bell nozzles (75 to 85% length)
are just as efficient as or slightly more efficient than a longer 15° conical nozzle
(100% length) at the same area ratio. For shorter nozzles (below 70% equiva
lent length) the energy losses due to internal oblique shock waves become
substantial and such short nozzles are not commonly used today.
For solid propellant rocket motor exhausts with small solid particles in the
gas (usually aluminum oxide), and for exhausts of certain gelled liquid propel
lants, there is an impingement of these solid particles against the nozzle wall in
FIGURE 3-14. Top sketch shows comparison sketches of nozzle inner wall surfaces for
a 15° conical nozzle, an 80% length bell nozzle, a 60% length bell nozzle, all at an area
ratio of 25. The lengths are expressed in multiples of the throat radius r 1e,
e
which is one
here. The middle set of curves shows the initial angle 8; and the exit angle as functions
of the nozzle area ratio and percent length. The bottom curves show the nozzle losses in
terms of a correction factor. Adapted and copied with permission of AIAA from
Ref. 6-1.
82 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
the reversing curvature section between I and E in Fig. 3-14. While the gas can
be turned by oblique waves to have less divergence, the particles (particularly
the larger particles) have a tendency to move in straight lines and hit the walls
at high velocity. The resulting abrasion and erosion of the nozzle wall can be
severe, especially with the ablative and graphite materials that are commonly
used. This abrasion by hot particles increases with turn-back angle. If the turn
back angle and thus also the inflection angle e; are reduced, the erosion can
become acceptable. Typical solid rocket motors flying today have values of
inflection angles between 20 and 26° and turn-back angles of 10 to 15°. In
comparison, current liquid rocket engines without entrained particles have
inflection angles between 27 and 50° and turn-back angles of between 15 and
30°. Therefore the performance enhancement caused by using a bell-shaped
nozzle (high value of correction factor) is somewhat lower in solid rocket
motors with solid particles in the exhaust.
The ideal bell-shaped nozzle (minimum loss) is long, equivalent to a conical
nozzle of perhaps IO to 12°, as seen in Fig. 3-12. It has about the same length
as a full-length aerospike nozzle. This is usually too long for reasonable vehicle
mass ratios.
Two-Step Nozzles. Several modifications of a bell-shaped nozzle have
evolved that allow full or almost complete altitude compensation; that is, they
achieve maximum performance at more than a single altitude. Figure 3-15
shows three concepts for a two-step nozzle, one that has an initial low area
ratio A 2/ A 1 for operation at or near the earth's surface and a larger second area
ratio that improves performance at high altitudes. See Ref. 3-5.
The extendible nozzle requires actuators, a power supply, mechanisms for
moving the extension into position during flight, fastening and sealing devices.
It has successfully flown in several solid rocket motor nozzles and in a few
liquid engine applications, where it was deployed prior to ignition. Although
only two steps are shown, there have been versions with three steps; one is
shown in Fig. 11-3. As yet it has not made the change in area ratio during
rocket firing. The principal concerns are a reliable rugged mechanism to move
the extension into position, the hot gas seal between the nozzle sections, and
the extra weight involved.
The droppable insert concept avoids the moving mechanism and gas seal but
has a potential stagnation temperature problem at the joint. It requires a reli
able release mechanism, and the ejected insert creates flying debris. To date it
has little actual test experience. See Ref. 3-12.
The dual bell nozzle concept uses two shortened bell nozzles combined into
one with a bump or inflection point between them, as shown in Fig. 3-15.
During ascent it functions first at the lower area ratio, with separation occur
ring at the inflection point. As altitude increases and the gas expands further,
the flow attaches itself downstream of this point, with the flow filling the full
nozzle exit section and operating with the higher area ratio at higher perfor
mance. There is a small performance penalty for a compromised bell nozzle
3.4. NOZZLE CONFIGURATIONS 83
Second nozzle exit segment
in stored position
Extendible
nozzle with
two segments
-'I' Center line
Chamber ~First Second-.!
I
I nozzle exit nozzle exit I
segment segment in
(fixed to deployed position
chamber) after moving aft
Droppable insert
(mechanisms for holding,
moving, or releasing the
inserts are not shown)
Chamber
Protrusion or hump in contour\
:3 !§
Dual bell nozzle ~ ~~Ring shaped
~~ bump
FIGURE 3-15. Simplified diagrams of three altitude-compensating two-step nozzle
concepts.
contour with a circular bump. To date there has been little experience with this
concept.
Nozzles with Aerodynamic Boundaries
The group of two-step nozzle concepts described above corresponds to the
performance represented by upper portions of the two fixed area ratio nozzle
curves shown in Fig. 3-10; the performance of a continuously varying nozzle
with full altitude compensation is shown by the dashed curve. When integrated
over the flight time, the extra performance is important for high velocity mis
sions such as the single stage to orbit application. The three nozzles shown on
the right side of Fig. 3-12 offer full altitude compensation and are discussed
next. Refs. 3-5 and 3-8 give more information.
The plug nozzle or aerospike nozzle has an annular doughnut-shaped cham
ber with an annular nozzle slot. An alternate version has a number of indivi
dual small chambers (each with low area ratio short nozzles, a round throat,
and a rectangular exit) arranged in a circle around a common plug or spike.
The outside aerodynamic boundary of the gas flow in the divergent section of
84 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
the nozzle is the interface between the hot gas and the ambient air; there is no
outer wall as in a conical or bell-shaped nozzle. As the external or ambient
pressure is reduced during the ascending flight, this gas boundary expands
outward, causes a change in pressure distribution on the central spike, and
allows an automatic and continuous altitude compensation. The aerospike
contour with the minimum flow losses turns out to be very long, similar in
length to an optimum bell nozzle as shown in Figs. 3-12 and 3-13. The mass
flow per unit exit area is relatively uniform over the cross section and the
divergence losses are minimal.
If the central plug is cut off or truncated and the wall contour is slightly
altered, then the nozzle will be very short, as shown in Fig. 3-13; it will have
some internal supersonic waves and will show a small but real loss in thrust
compared to a nozzle with a full central spike. The pressure distribution and
the heat transfer intensity vary on the inner contoured spike wall surface.
Figure 8-14 shows a typical pressure distribution over the contoured spike
surface at high and low altitudes.
The pressure in the recirculating trapped gas of the subsonic region below
the bottom plate also exerts a thrust force. The losses caused by the cut-off
spike can be largely offset by injecting a small amount of the gas flow (about
I% of total flow) through this base plate into the recirculating region, thus
enhancing the back pressure on the base plate. The advantages of the truncated
aerospike are short length (which helps to reduce the length and mass of the
flight vehicle), full altitude compensation, no flow separation from the wall at
lower altitudes, and ease of vehicle/engine integration for certain vehicle con
figurations.
The linear aerospike nozzle is a variation of the round axisymmetric aero
spike nozzle. Basically, it is an unrolled version of the circular configuration. It
is explained further in Chapter 8.2.
In the expansion deflection nozzle (Fig. 3-12) the flow from the chamber is
directed radially outward away from the nozzle axis. The flow is turned on a
curved contour outer diverging nozzle wall. The nozzle has been shortened and
has some internal oblique shock wave losses. The hot gas flow leaving the
chamber expands around a central plug. The aerodynamic interface between
the ambient air and gas flow forms an inner boundary of the gas flow in the
diverging nozzle section. As the ambient pressure is reduced, the hot gas flow
fills more and more of the nozzle diverging section. Altitude compensation is
achieved by this change in flow boundary and by changes in the pressure
distribution on the outer walls.
Multiple Nozzles. If a single large nozzle is replaced by a cluster of smaller
nozzles on a solid motor (all at the same cumulative thrust), then it is possible
to reduce the nozzle length. Similarly, if a single large thrust chamber of a
liquid engine is replaced by several smaller thrust chambers, the nozzle length
will be shorter, reducing the vehicle length and thus the vehicle structure and
inert mass. Russia has pioneered a set of four thrust chambers, each with 25%
3.5. REAL NOZZLES 85
of the total thrust, assembled next to each other and fed from the same liquid
propellant feed system. This quadruple thrust chamber arrangement has been
used effectively on many large Russian space launch vehicles and missiles. As
seen in Fig. 3-13, this cluster is about 30% shorter than a single large thrust
chamber. The vehicle diameter at the cluster nozzle exit is somewhat larger, the
vehicle drag is somewhat higher, and there is additional engine complexity and
engine mass.
3.5. REAL NOZZLES
In a real nozzle the flow is really two-dimensional, but axisymmetric. For
simple single nozzle shapes the temperatures and velocities are not uniform
over any one section and are usually higher in the central region and lower near
the periphery. For example, the surface where the Mach number is one is a
plane at the throat for an ideal nozzle; for two-dimensional flow it is typically a
slightly curved surface somewhat downstream of the throat. If the velocity
distribution is known, the average value of v can be determined for an axi
2
symmetric nozzle as a function of the radius r. ·
1'2
(v2)average = -2n Vzr dr (3-35)
A2 o
The 11 assumptions and simplifications listed in Section 1 of this chapter are
only approximations that allow relatively simple algorithms and simple math
ematical solutions to the analysis of real rocket nozzle phenomena. For most of
these assumptions it is possible either (1) to use an empirical correction factor
(based on experimental data) or (2) to develop or use a more accurate algo
rithm, which involves more detailed understanding and simulation of energy
losses, the physical or chemical phenomena, and also often a more complex
theoretical analysis and mathematical treatment. Some of these approaches are
mentioned briefly in this section.
Compared to an ideal nozzle, the real nozzle has energy losses and energy
that is unavailable for conversion into kinetic energy of the exhaust gas. The
principal losses are listed below and several of these are discussed in more
detail.
I. The divergence of the fl.ow in the nozzle exit sections causes a loss, which
varies as a function of the cosine of the divergence angle as shown by
Eq. 3-34 and Table 3-3 for conical nozzles. The losses can be reduced
for bell-shaped nozzle contours.
2. Small chamber or port area cross sections relative to the throat area or
low nozzle contraction ratios A 1 / A 1 cause pressure losses in the chamber
and reduce the thrust and exhaust velocity slightly. See Table 3-2.
86 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
3. Lower flow velocity in the boundary layer or wall friction can reduce the
effective exhaust velocity by 0.5 to 1.5%.
4. Solid particles or liquid roplets in the gas can cause losses up to 5%, as
described below.
5. Unsteady combustion and oscillating flow can account for a small loss.
6. Chemical reactions in nozzle flow change gas properties and gas tem
peratures, giving typically a 0.5% loss. See Chapter 5.
7. There is lower performance during transient pressure operation, for
example during start, stop, or pulsing.
8. For uncooled nozzle materials, such as fiber reinforced plastics or car
bon, the gradual erosion of the throat region increases the throat dia
meter by perhaps 1 to 6% during operation. In turn this will reduce the
chamber pressure and thrust by about 1 to 6% near the end of the
operation and cause a slight reduction in specific impulse of less than
0.7%.
9. Non-uniform gas composition can reduce performance (due to incom
plete mixing, turbulence, or incomplete combustion regions).
10. Using real gas properties can at times change the gas composition, the
value of k and Wl, and this can cause a small loss in performance, say 0.2
to 0.7%.
11. Operation at non-optimum nozzle expansion area ratio can reduce
thrust and specific impulse. There is no loss if the vehicle always flies
at the altitude for optimum nozzle expansion (p 2 = p 3). If it flies with a
fixed nozzle area ratio at higher or lower altitudes, then there is a loss
(during a portion of the flight) by up to 15% in thrust compared to a
nozzle with altitude compensation, as can be seen in Figs. 3-7 and 3-8.
It also reduces performance by 1 to 5%.
Boundary Layer
Real nozzles have a viscous boundary layer next to the nozzle walls, where the
gas velocities are much lower than the free-stream velocities in the inviscid
flow regions. An enlarged schematic view of a boundary layer is shown in
Fig. 3-16. Immediately next to the wall the flow velocity is zero and then the
boundary layer can be considered as being built up of successive annular
shaped thin layers of increasing velocity until the free-stream velocity is
reached. The low-velocity flow close to the wall is laminar and subsonic,
but in the higher-velocity regions of the boundary layer the flow is supersonic
and can become turbulent. The local temperature in part of the boundary
layer can be substantially higher than the free-stream temperature because of
the conversion of kinetic energy into thermal energy as the local velocity is
slowed down and as heat is created by viscous friction. The layer right next
to the wall will be cooler because of heat transfer to the wall. The gaseous
3.5. REAL NOZZLES 87
Subsonic flow can
bend up to 180°
Nozzle wall
Boundary layer thickness
Supersonic portion of boundary layer
Wall thickness Nozzle wall
t t
_l_ Vw= 0
~
T
I
Boundary
layer
thickness
Velocity profile Temperature profile
FIGURE 3-16. Flow conditions at a nozzle exit lip at high altitude, showing stream
lines, boundary layer, velocity and temperature profiles.
boundary layer has a profound effect on the overall heat transfer to nozzle
and chamber walls. It also has an effect on the rocket performance, particu
larly in applications with relatively long nozzles with high nozzle area ratios,
where a relatively high proportion of the total mass flow (2 to 25%) can be in
the lower-velocity region of the boundary layer. The high gradients in pres
sure, temperature, or density and the changes in local velocity (direction and
magnitude) influence the boundary layer. Scaling laws for boundary layer
phenomena have not been reliable.
Theoretical approaches to boundary layer performance effects can be found
in Chapters 26 to 28 of Reference 3-1 and in Reference 1-1. A truly satisfac
tory theoretical analysis of boundary layers in rocket nozzles has not yet been
developed. Fortunately, the overall effect of boundary layers on rocket perfor
mance has been small. For most rocket nozzles the loss seldom exceeds 1% of
specific impulse.
88 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
Multiphase Flow
In some rockets the gaseous working fluid contains many small liquid droplets
and/or solid particles that must be accelerated by the gas. They give up heat to
the gas during the expansion in a nozzle. This, for example, occurs with solid
propellants (see Chapter 12) or some gelled liquid propellants (Chapter 7),
which contain aluminum powder that forms small oxide particles in the
exhaust. It can also occur with ion oxide catalysts, or propellants containing
beryllium, boron, or zirconium.
In general, if the particles are very small (typically with diameters of 0.005
mm or less), they will have almost the same velocity as the gas and will be in
thermal equilibrium with the nozzle gas flow. Thus, as the gases give up kinetic
energy to accelerate the particles, they gain thermal energy from the particles.
As the particle diameters become larger, the mass (and thus the inertia) of the
particle increases as the cube of its diameter; however, the drag force increases
only as the square of the diameter. Larger particles therefore do not move as
fast as the gas and do not give heat to the gas as readily as do smaller particles.
The larger particles have a lower momentum than an equivalent mass of smal
ler particles and they reach the nozzle exit at a higher temperature than the
smaller particles, thus giving up less thermal energy.
It is possible to derive a simple theoretical approach for correcting the
performance Us, c, or c*) as shown below and as given in Refs. 3-13 and 3-
14. It is based on the assumption that specific heats of the gases and the
particles are constant throughout the nozzle flow, that the particles are small
enough to move at the same velocity as the gas and are in thermal equilibrium
with the gas, and that particles do not exchange mass with the gas (no vapor
ization or condensation). Expansion and acceleration occur only in the gas and
the volume occupied by the particles is negligibly small compared to the gas
volume. If the amount of particles is small, the energy needed to accelerate the
particles can be neglected. There are no chemical reactions.
The enthalpy h, the specific volume V, and the gas constant R can be
expressed as functions of the particle fraction {3, which is the mass of particles
(liquid and/or solid) divided by the total mass. Using the subscripts g ands to
refer to the gas or solid state, the following relationships then apply:
h = (I - f3)(cp)gT + f3csT (3-36)
V = Vg(l - /3) (3-37)
p = RgT/Vg (3-38)
R = (I - {3)Rg (3-39)
= +
k (I - f3)cp f3cs
(3-40)
+
(I - f3)cv f3cs
These relations are then used in the formulas for simple one-dimensional noz
zle flow, such as Eq. 2-16, 3-15, or 3-32. The values of specific impulse or
3.5. REAL NOZZLES 89
characteristic velocity will decrease as {J, the percent of particles, is increased.
For very small particles (less than 0.01 mm in diameter) and small values of fJ
(less than 6%) the loss in specific impulse is often less than 2%. For larger
particles (over 0.015 mm diameter) and larger values of fJ this theory is not
helpful and the specific impulse can be 10 to 20% less than the / value without
5
flow lag. The actual particle sizes and distribution depend on the specific
propellant, the combustion, the particular particle material, and the specific
rocket propulsion system, and usually have to be measured (see Chapters 12
and 18). Thus adding a metal, such as aluminum, to a solid propellant will
increase the performance only if the additional heat release can increae the
combustion temperature T sufficiently so that it more than offsets the decrease
1
caused by particles in the exhaust.
With very-high-area-ratio nozzles and a low nozzle exit pressure (high alti
tude or space vacuum) it is possible to condense some of the propellant ingre
dients that are normally gases. As the temperature drops sharply in the nozzle,
it is possible to condense gaseous species such as H 20, CO 2, or NH 3 and form
liquid droplets. This causes a decrease in the gas flow per unit area and the
transfer of the latent heat of vaporization to the remaining gas. The overall
effect on performance is small if the droplet size is small and the percent of
condensed gas mass is moderate. It is also possible to form a solid phase and
precipitate fine particles of snow (H 0) or frozen fog of other species.
2
Other Phenomena and Losses
The combustion process is really not steady. Low- and high-frequency oscilla
tions in chamber pressure of up to perhaps 5% of rated value are usually
considered as smooth-burning and relatively steady flow. Gas properties
(k, 9Jl, cp) and flow properties (v, V, T,p, etc.) will also oscillate with time
and will not necessarily be uniform across the flow channel. These properties
are therefore only "average" values, but it is not always clear what kind of an
average they are. The energy loss due to nonuniform unsteady burning is
difficult to assess theoretically. For smooth-burning rocket systems they are
negligibly small, but they become significant for larger-amplitude oscillations.
The composition of the gas changes somewhat in the nozzle, chemical reac
tions occur in the flowing gas, and the assumption of a uniform or "frozen"
equilibrium gas composition is not fully valid. A more sophisticated analysis
for determining performance with changing composition and changing gas
properties is described in Chapter 5. The thermal energy that is carried out
of the nozzle (m cP T 2) is unavailable for conversion to useful propulsive
(kinetic) energy, as is shown in Fig. 2-3. The only way to decrease this loss
is to reduce the nozzle exit temperature T (larger nozzle area ratio), but even
2
then it is a large loss.
When the operating durations are short (as, for example, with antitank
rockets or pulsed attitude control rockets which start and stop repeatedly),
the start and stop transients are a significant portion of the total operating
90 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
time. During the transient periods of start and stop the average thrust, cham
ber pressure, or specific impulse will be lower in value than those same para
meters at steady full operating conditions. This can be analyzed in a step-by
step process. For example, during startup the amount of propellant reacting in
the chamber has to equal the flow of gas through the nozzle plus the amount of
gas needed to fill the chamber to a higher pressure; alternatively, an empirical
curve of chamber pressure versus time can be used as the basis of such a
calculation. The transition time is very short in small, low-thrust propulsion
systems, perhaps a few milliseconds, but it can be longer (several seconds) for
large propulsion systems.
Performance Correction Factors
In this section we discuss semiempirical correction factors that have been used
to estimate the test performance data from theoretical, calculated performance
values. An understanding of the theoretical basis also allows correlations
between several of the correction factors and estimates of the influence of
several parameters, such as pressure, temperature, or specific heat ratio.
The energy conversion efficiency is defined as the ratio of the kinetic energy
per unit of flow of the actual jet leaving the nozzle to the kinetic energy per unit
of flow of a hypothetical ideal exhaust jet that is supplied with the same work
ing substance at the same initial state and velocity and expands to the same exit
pressure as the real nozzle. This relationship is expressed as
(3-41)
where e denotes the energy conversion efficiency, v and v the velocities at the
1 2
nozzle inlet and exit, and cPT
1
and cPT2 the respective enthalpies for an ideal
isentropic expansion. The subscripts a and i refer to actual and ideal condi
tions, respectively. For many practical applications, v 1 - 0 and the square of
the expression given in Eq. 3-16 can be used for the denominator.
The velocity correction factor Sv is defined as the square root of the energy
conversion efficiency y'e. Its value ranges between 0.85 and 0.99, with an
average near 0.92. This factor is also approximately the ratio of the actual
specific impulse to the ideal or theoretical specific impulse.
The discharge correction factor Sd is defined as the ratio of the mass flow rate
in a real rocket to that of an ideal rocket that expands an identical working
fluid from the same initial conditions to the same exit pressure (Eq. 2-17).
(3-42)
and, from Eq. 3-24,
3.5. REAL NOZZLES 91
The value of this discharge correction factor is usually larger than 1 (1.0 to
1.15); the actual flow is larger than the theoretical flow for the following
reasons:
1. The molecular weight of the gases usually increases slightly when flowing
through a nozzle, thereby changing the gas density.
2. Some heat is transferred to the nozzle walls. This lowers the temperature
in the nozzle, and increases the density and mass flow slightly.
3. The specific heat and other gas properties change in an actual nozzle in
such a manner as to slightly increase the value of the discharge correction
factor.
4. Incomplete combustion can increase the density of the exhaust gases.
The actual thrust is usually lower than the thrust calculated for an ideal
rocket and can be found by an empirical thrust correction factor tF:
(3-43)
where
(3-44)
Values of tF fall between 0.92 and 1.00 (see Eqs. 2-6 and 3-31). Because the
thrust correction factor is equal to the product of the discharge correction
factor and the velocity correction factor, any one can be determined if the
other two are known.
Example 3-7. Design a rocket nozzle to conform to the following conditions:
Chamber pressure 20.4 atm = 2.068 MPa
Atmospheric pressure 1.0 atm
Chamber temperature 2861 K
Mean molecular mass of gases 21.87 kg/kg-mo!
Ideal specific impulse 230 sec (at operating conditions)
Specific heat ratio 1.229
Desired thrust 1300 N
Determine the following: nozzle throat and exit areas, respective diameters, actual
exhaust velocity, and actual specific impulse.
SOLUTION. The theoretical thrust coefficient is found from Eq. 3-30. For optimum
conditions p 2 = p 3• By substituting k = 1.229 and pifp 2 = 20.4, the thrust coefficient is
CF= 1.405. This value can be checked by interpolation between the values of CF
92 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
obtained from Figs. 3-7 and 3-8. The throat area is found using SF= 0.96, which is
based on test data.
A1 = F /(t;FCFp1) = 1300/(0.96 x 1.405 x 2.068 x 106 ) = 4.66 cm2
The throat diameter is then 2.43 cm. The area expansion ratio can be determined from
Fig. 3-5 or Eq. 3-25 as E = 3.42. The exit area is
A 2 = 4.66 x 3.42 = 15.9 cm2
The exit diameter is therefore 4.50 cm. The theoretical exhaust velocity is
v = / g = 230 x 9.81 = 2256 m/ sec
2 5 0
By selecting an empirical velocity correction factor Sv such as 0.92 (based on prior
related experience), the actual exhaust velocity will be equal to
(v )a = 2256 x 0.92 = 2076 m/ sec
2
Because the specific impulse is proportional to the exhaust velocity, its actual value can
be found by multiplying the theoretical value by the velocity correction factor t;V'
(/,)a= 230 x 0.92 = 212 sec
3.6. FOUR PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS
In using values of thrust, specific impulse, propellant flow, and other perfor
mance parameters, one must be careful to specify or qualify the conditions
under which a specific number is presented. There are at least four sets of
performance parameters and they are often quite different in concept and
value, even when referring to the same rocket propulsion system. Each perfor
m,
mance parameter, such as F, / c, v and/or should be accompanied by a
5, 2
clear definition of the conditions under which it applies, namely:
a. Chamber pressure; also, for slender chambers, the location where this
pressure prevails (e.g., at nozzle entrance).
b. Ambient pressure or altitude or space (vacuum).
c. Nozzle expansion area ratio and whether this is an optimum.
d. Nozzle shape and exit angle (see Table 3-3).
e. Propellants, their composition or mixture ratio.
f Key assumptions and corrections made in the calculations of the theore
tical performance: for example, was frozen or shifting equilibrium used in
the analysis? (This is described in Chapter 5.)
g. Initial temperature of propellants.
3.6. FOUR PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS 93
1. Theoretical performance values are defined in Chapters 2, 3, and 5 and
generally apply to ideal rockets, but usually with some corrections. Most orga
nizations doing nozzle design have their own computer programs, often differ
ent programs for different nozzle designs, different thrust levels, or operating
durations. Most are two dimensional and correct for the chemical reactions in
the nozzle using real gas properties, and correct for divergence. Many also
correct for one or more of the other losses mentioned above. For example,
programs for solid propellant motor nozzles can include losses for throat ero
sion and multiphase flow; for liquid propellant engines it may include two or
more concentric zones, each at different mixtures ratios and thus with different
gas properties. Nozzle wall contour analysis with expansion and compression
waves may use a finite element analysis and/or a method of characteristics
approach. Some of the more sophisticated programs include viscous boundary
layer effects and heat transfer to the walls. Typically these computer simulation
programs are based on computer fluid dynamics finite element analyses and on
the basic Navier-Stokes relationships. Most companies also have simpler, one
dimensional computer programs which may include one or more of the above
corrections; they are used frequently for preliminary estimates or proposals.
2. Delivered, that is, actually measured, performance values are obtained
from static tests or flight tests of full-scale propulsion systems. Again, the
conditions should be explained (e.g., define Pr, A 2/A 1, Tr, etc.) and the mea
sured values should be corrected for instrument deviations, errors, or calibra
tion constants. Flight test data need to be corrected for aerodynamic effects,
such as drag. Often empirical coefficients, such as the thrust correction factor,
the velocity correction factor, and the mass discharge flow correction factors
are used to convert the theoretical values of item I above to approximate actual
values and this is often satisfactory for preliminary estimates. Sometimes sub
scale propulsion systems are used in the development of new rocket systems
and then scale factors are used to correct the measured data to full-scale values.
3. Performance values at standard conditions are corrected values of items 1
and 2 above. These standard conditions are generally rigidly specified by the
customer. Usually they refer to conditions that allow ready evaluation or
comparison with reference values and often they refer to conditions that can
be easily measured and/or corrected. For example, to allow a good comparison
of specific impulse for several propellants or rocket propulsion systems, the
values are often corrected to the following standard conditions (see Examples
3-4 and 3-5):
a. Pr = 1000 psia or 6.894 x 106 Pa.
b. p = p = 14.69 psia (sea level) or 1.0132 x 105 Pa or 0.10132 MPa.
2 3
c. Area ratio is optimum, P2 = p3.
d. Nozzle divergence half angle a= 15° for conical nozzles, or some agreed
upon value.
94 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
e. Specific propellant, its design mixture ratio and/or propellant composi
tion.
f. Propellant initial temperature: 21 °C (sometimes 20 or 25°C) or boiling
temperature, if cryogenic.
A rocket propulsion system is generally designed, built, tested, and delivered in
accordance with some predetermined requirements or specifications, usually in
formal documents often called the rocket engine or rocket motor specifications.
They define the performance as shown above and they also define many other
requirements. More discussion of these specifications is given as a part of the
selection process for propulsion systems in Chapter 17.
4. Rocket manufacturers are often required by their customers to deliver
rocket propulsion systems with a guaranteed minimum performance, such as
minimum F or / or both. The determination of this value can be based on a
5
nominal value (items I or 2 above) diminished by all likely losses, including
changes in chamber pressure due to variation of pressure drops in injector or
pipelines, a loss due to nozzle surface roughness, propellant initial ambient
temperatures, manufacturing variations from rocket to rocket (e.g., in grain
volume, nozzle dimensions, or pump impeller diameters, etc.). This minimum
value can be determined by a probabilistic evaluation of these losses and is then
usually validated by actual full-scale static and flights tests.
3.7. NOZZLE ALIGNMENT
When the thrust line or direction does not intersect the center of mass of a
flying vehicle, a turning moment will tend to rotate a vehicle in flight.
Turning moments are desirable and necessary for the controlled turning or
attitude control of a vehicle as is routinely done by means of the deflection of
the thrust vector, aerodynamic fins, or by separate attitude control rocket
engines. However, this turning is undesirable when its magnitude or direction
is not known; this happens when a fixed nozzle of a major propulsion system
has its thrust axis misaligned. A large high-thrust booster rocket system, even
!
if misaligned by a very small angle (less than 0 can cause major upsetting
),
turning moments for the firing duration. If not corrected or compensated,
such a small misalignment can cause the flight vehicle to tumble and/or
deviate from the intended flight path. For this moment not to exceed the
vehicle's compensating attitude control capability, it is necessary to align the
nozzle axis of all propulsion systems with fixed (non-gimbal) nozzles very
accurately. Normally, the geometric axis of the nozzle diverging exit surface
geometry is taken to be the thrust axis. Special alignment fixtures are usually
needed to orient the nozzle axis to be within less than ±0.25° of the intended
line to the vehicle's center of gravity and to position the center of a large
3.7. NOZZLE ALIGNMENT 95
nozzle throat to be on the vehicle centerline, say within 1 or 2 mm. See Ref.
3-15.
There are other types of misalignments: (1) irregularities in the nozzle
geometry (out of round, protuberances, or unsymmetrical roughness in the
surface); (2) transient misalignments during start to stop; (3) uneven
deflection of the propulsion system or vehicle structure under load; and
(4) irregularities in the gas flow (faulty injector, uneven burning rate in
solid propellants). For simple unguided rocket vehicles it has been cus
tomary to rotate or spin the vehicle to prevent the misalignment from
being in one direction only or to even out the misalignment during
powered flight.
In the cramped volume of spacecraft or upper stage launch vehicles, it is
sometimes not possible to accommodate the full length of a large-area-ratio
nozzle within the available vehicle envelope. In this case the nozzles are cut off
at an angle at the vehicle surface, which allows a compact installation. Figure
3-17 shows a diagram of two ( out of four) roll control thrusters whose nozzle
exit conforms to the vehicle contour. The thrust direction of a scarfed nozzle is
Geometric centerline of nozzle
I
I
I
\
Vehicle skin
I
--------
Thrust deflection effective angle
'-i \/
I
\Direction of resulting thrust
FIGURE 3-17. Simplified partial section of a flight vehicle showing two attitude con
trol thrusters with scarfed nozzles to fit a cylindrical vehicle envelope.
96 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
no longer on the nozzle axis centerline, as it is with fully symmetrical nozzles,
and the nozzle exit flow will not be axisymmetric. Reference 3-16 shows how to
estimate the performance and thrust direction of scarfed nozzles
3.8. VARIABLE THRUST
Only a few applications require a change in thrust during flight. Equations 3-
30, 3-24, and 3-31 show that the thrust is directly proportional to the throat
m,
area At, the chamber pressure p 1, or the mass flow rate but it is a weak
function of CF, which in turn depends on k, the altitude, a pressure ratio, and
A 2/ At· These equations show how the thrust may be varied and imply how
other performance parameters may be affected by such variation. For liquid
propellant rockets the mass flow to the chamber can be decreased (by throttling
valves in the propellant feed system) while the chamber geometry and the
nozzle throat area are unchanged. The reduced mass flow will cause an almost
linear decrease in p and thus an almost linear decrease of F. The combustion
1
temperature does change slightly but it does not enter into the above relations.
The specific impulse would also decrease slightly. Thus, there is a small per
formance penalty for throttling the thrust. A two-to-one thrust decrease has
been achieved with throttle valves in a liquid propellant rocket engine.
Random throttling of liquid propellant engines and their design features are
discussed in Chapter 8.5.
Another way of varying the thrust is to change the throat area simulta
neously with throttling the flow (by inserting a moveable contoured pintle or
tapered plug into the nozzle); in this case the chamber pressure p can remain
1
reasonably constant. This throttling method has been used on liquid propellant
engines (e.g., a ten-to-one thrust change on a moon landing rocket) and in a
few experimental solid propellant motors.
Random thrust control requires a control system and special hardware; one
example is discussed in Chapter 10.5. Random throttling of production solid
propellant motors has not been achieved as yet in flight. A repeatable, pro
grammed variation of thrust for solid propellants is possible and is discussed in
Chapter 11.3. For solid propellants, a predetermined variation of mass flow
rate has been achieved by clever grain geometric design, which changes the
burning area at different stages during the operation. This is useful in many air
launched military rockets. Liquid propellant rockets are the most appropriate
choice for randomly variable thrust rockets, as has been amply demonstrated
in missions such as the lunar landings.
PROBLEMS 97
PROBLEMS
1. Certain experimental results indicate that the propellant gases of a liquid oxygen
gasoline reaction have a mean molecular mass of 23.2 kg/kg-mo! and a specific heat
ratio of 1.22. Compute the specific heat at constant pressure and at constant
volume, assuming a perfect gas.
2. The actual conditions for an optimum expansion nozzle operating at sea level are
given below. Calculate v 2, T 2, and CF. The mass flow m= 3.7 kg/sec;p 1 = 2.1 MPa;
T = 2585°K; 9Jl = 18.0 kg/kg-mo!; and k = 1.30.
1
3. A certain nozzle expands a gas under isentropic conditions. Its chamber or nozzle
entry velocity equals 70 m/sec, its final velocity 1500 m/sec. What is the change in
enthalpy of the gas? What percentage of error is introduced if the initial velocity is
neglected?
4. Nitrogen at 500°C (k = 1.38, molecular mass is 28.00) flows at a Mach number of
2. 73. What are its actual and its acoustic velocity?
5. The following data are given for an optimum rocket:
Average molecular mass 24 kg/kg-mo!
Chamber pressure 2.533 MPa
External pressure 0.090 MPa
Chamber temperature 2900 K
Throat area 0.00050 m2
Specific heat ratio 1.30
Determine (a) throat velocity; (b) specific volume at throat; (c) propellant flow and
specific impulse; (d) thrust; (e) Mach number at throat.
6. Determine the ideal thrust coefficient for Problem 5 by two methods.
7. A certain ideal rocket with a nozzle area ratio of 2.3 and a throat area of 5 in.2
delivers gases at k = 1.30 and R = 66 ft-lbf/lbm-0R at a design chamber pressure of
300 psia and a constant chamber temperature of 5300 R against a back pressure of
10 psia. By means of an appropriate valve arrangement, it is possible to throttle the
propellant flow to the thrust chamber. Calculate and plot against pressure the
following quantities for 300, 200, and 100 psia chamber pressure: (a) pressure
ratio between chamber and atmosphere; (b) effective exhaust velocity for area
ratio involved; (c) ideal exhaust velocity for optimum and actual area ratio; (d)
propellant flow; (e) thrust; (f) specific impulse; (g) exit pressure; (h) exit tempera
ture.
8. For an ideal rocket with a characteristic velocity c* = 1500 m/sec, a nozzle throat
diameter of 18 cm, a thrust coefficient of 1.38, and a mass flow rate of 40 kg/sec,
compute the chamber pressure, the thrust, and the specific impulse.
9. For the rocket unit given in Example 3-2 compute the exhaust velocity if the nozzle
is cut off and the exit area is arbitrarily decreased by 50%. Estimate the losses in
kinetic energy and thrust and express them as a percentage of the original kinetic
energy and the original thrust.
10. What is the maximum velocity if the nozzle in Example 3-2 was designed to expand
into a vacuum? If the expansion area ratio was 2000?
98 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
11. Construction of a variable-area nozzle has often been considered to make the
operation of a rocket thrust chamber take place at the optimum expansion ratio
at any altitude. Because of the enormous design difficulties of such a device, it has
never been successfully realized. Assuming that such a mechanism can eventually be
constructed, what would have to be the variation of the area ratio with altitude (plot
up to 50 km) if such a rocket had a chamber pressure of 20 atm? Assume that
k = 1.20
12. Design a supersonic nozzle to operate at IO km altitude with an area ratio of 8.0.
For the hot gas take T = 3000 K, R = 378 J/kg-K and k = 1.3. Determine the exit
0
Mach number, exit velocity, and exit temperature, as well as the chamber pressure.
If this chamber pressure is doubled, what happens to the thrust and the exit velo
city? Assume no change in gas properties. How close to optimum nozzle expansion
is this nozzle?
13. The German World War II A-4 propulsion system had a sea level thrust of 25,400
kg and a chamber pressure of 1.5 MPa. If the exit pressure is 0.084 MPa and the exit
diameter 740 mm, what is the thrust at 25,000 m?
14. Derive Eq. 3-34. (Hint: Assume that all the mass flow originates at the apex of the
cone.) Calculate the nozzle angle correction factor for a conical nozzle whose diver
gence half angle is 13°.
15. For Example 3-2, determine (a) the actual thrust; (b) the actual exhaust velocity; (c)
the actual specific impulse; (d) the velocity correction factor. Assume that the thrust
correction factor is 0.985 and the discharge correction factor is 1.050.
16. An ideal rocket has the following characteristics:
Chamber pressure 27.2 atm
Nozzle exit pressure 3 psia
Specific heat ratio 1.20
Average molecular mass 21.0 lbm/lb-mol
Chamber temperature 4200°F
Determine the critical pressure ratio, the gas velocity at the
throat, the expansion area ratio, and the theoretical nozzle
exit velocity.
Answers: 0.5645; 3470 ft/sec; 14; and 8570 ft/sec.
17. For an ideal rocket with a characteristic velocity c* of 1220 1 ·m
m/sec, a mass flow rate of 73.0 kg/sec, a thrust coefficient of
1.50, and a nozzle throat area of 0.0248 m2 , compute the
effective exhaust velocity, the thrust, the chamber pressure,
and the specific impulse.
Answers: 1830 m/sec; 133,560 N; 3.590 x 106 N/m2 ; 186.7 sec.
18. Derive equations 3-24 and 3-25.
19. A propulsion system with a thrust of 400,000 N is expected to
have a maximum thrust misalignment a of ±0.50 degrees and
a horizontal off-set d of the thrust vector of 0.125 in. as
shown in this sketch. One of four small reaction control
thrust chambers will be used to counteract the disturbing
torque. What should be its maximum thrust level and best
orientation? Distance of vernier gymbal to CG is 7 m.
SYMBOLS 99
SYMBOLS
A area, m2 (ft2 )
c effective exhaust velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
er specific heat at constant pressure, J/kg-K (Btu/lbm-R)
cs specific heat of solid, J/kg-K (Btu/lbm-R)
cv specific heat at constant volume, J/kg-K (Btu/lbm-R)
c* characteristic velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
CF thrust coefficient
CD discharge coefficient (I/ c*), sec/m (sec/ft)
d total derivative
D diameter, m (ft)
e energy conversion efficiency
F thrust, N (lbt)
g standard sea level gravitational acceleration, 9.8066 m/sec2
0
(32.174 ft/sec2 )
h enthalpy per unit mass, J/kg (Btu/lbm)
ls specific impulse, sec or N-sec3 /kg-m (lbf-sec/lbm)
J mechanical equivalent of heat; J = 4.186 J/cal in SI units or I Btu
= 777.9 ft-lbf
k specific heat ratio
L length of nozzle, m (ft)
m
mass flow rate, kg/sec (lbm/sec)
M mach number
Wl molecular mass, kg/kg-mol (or molecular weight, lbm/lb-mol)
n; molar fraction of species i
p pressure, N/m2 (lbf /ft2 or lbf/in.2 )
R gas constant per unit weight, J/kg-K (ft-lbf/Ibm-R) (R = R' /Wl)
R' universal gas constant, 8314.3 J/kg mol-K (1544 ft-lb/lb mol-R)
T absolute temperature, K (R)
v velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
V specific volume, m3 /kg (ft3 /lbm)
w
propellant weight flow rate, N/sec (lbf/sec)
Greek Letters
a half angle of divergent conical nozzle section
f3 mass fraction of solid particles
E area ratio A2/ A
1
~d discharge correction factor
~F thrust correction factor
~v velocity correction factor
).. divergence angle correction factor for conical nozzle exit
100 NOZZLE THEORY AND THERMODYNAMIC RELATIONS
Subscripts
a actual
g gas
ideal, or a particular species in a mixture
max maximum
opt optimum nozzle expansion
s solid
sep point of separation
t throat
x any plane within rocket nozzle
y any plane within rocket nozzle
0 stagnation or impact condition
1 nozzle inlet or chamber
2 nozzle exit
3 atmospheric or ambient
REFERENCES
3-1. A. H. Shapiro, The Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible Fluid Flow,
Vols. I and 2, The Ronald Press Company, New York, 1953 and M. J. Zucrow
and J. D. Hoffman, Gas Dynamics, Vols. I and II, John Wiley & Sons, 1976 (has
section on nozzle analysis by method of characteristics).
3-2. M. J. Moran and H. N. Shapiro, Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics,
Third edition, John Wiley & Sons, 1996; also additional text, 1997.
3-3. H. H. Koelle (Ed.), Handbook of Astronautical Engineering, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York, 1961.
3--4. T. V. Nguyen and J. L. Pieper, "Nozzle Separation Prediction Techniques and
Controlling Techniques," AIAA paper, 1996.
3-5. G. Hagemann, H. Immich, T. V. Nguyen, and D. E. Dumnov, "Advanced
Rocket Nozzles," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 14, No. 5, pp. 620-
634, AIAA, 1998.
3-6. M. Frey and G. Hagemann, "Flow Separation and Side-Loads in Rocket
Nozzles," AA/A Paper 99-2815, June 1999.
3-7. G. P. Sutton, "Flow through a Combustion Zone," Section of Chapter 3, Rocket
Propulsion Elements, John Wiley & Sons, Second, third, and fourth editions,
1956, 1963, and 1976.
3-8. J. A. Muss, T. V. Nguyen, E. J. Reske, and D. M. McDaniels, "Altitude
Compensating Nozzle Concepts for RLV," A/AA Paper 97-3222, July 1997.
3-9. G. V. R. Rao, "Recent Developments in Rocket Nozzle Configurations," ARS
Journal, Vol. 31, No. 11, November 1961, pp. 1488-1494; and G. V. R. Rao,
"Exhaust Nozzle Contour for Optimum Thrust," Jet Propulsion, Vol. 28, June
1958, pp. 377-382.
3-10. J. M. Farley and C. E. Campbell, "Performance of Several Method-of
Characteristics Exhaust Nozzles," NASA TN D-293, October 1960.
REFERENCES 101
3-11. J. D. Hoffman, "Design of Compressed Truncated Perfect Nozzles," Journal of
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 3, No. 2, March-April 1987, pp. 150--156.
3-12. G. P. Sutton, Stepped Nozzle, U.S. Patent 5,779,151, 1998.
3-13. F. A. Williams, M. Barrere, and N. C. Huang, "Fundamental Aspects of Solid
Propellant Rockets," AGARDograph 116, Advisory Group for Aerospace
Research and Development, NATO, October 1969, 783 pages.
3-14. M. Barrere, A. Jaumotte, B. Fraeijs de Veubeke, and J. Vandenkerckhove,
Rocket Propulsion, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1960.
3-15. R. N. Knauber, "Thrust Misalignments of Fixed Nozzle Solid Rocket Motors,"
AIAA Paper 92-2873, 1992.
3-16. J. S. Lilley, "The Design and Optimization of Propulsion Systems Employing
Scarfed Nozzles," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 23, No. 6, November
December 1986, pp. 597-604; and J. S. Lilley, "Experimental Validation of a
Performance Model for Scarfed Nozzles," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets,
Vol. 24, No. 5, September-October 1987, pp. 474-480.
CHAPTER 4
FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
This chapter deals with the performance of rocket-propelled vehicles such as
missiles, spacecraft, space launch vehicles, or projectiles. It is intended to give
the reader an introduction to the subject from a rocket propulsion point of
view. Rocket propulsion systems provide forces to a flight vehicle and cause it
to accelerate (or decelerate), overcome drag forces, or change flight direction.
They are usually applied to several different flight regimes: (I) flight within the
atmosphere (air-to-surface missiles or sounding rockets); (2) near-space envir
onment (earth satellites); (3) lunar and planetary flights; and (4) sun escape;
each is discussed further. References 4-1 to 4-4 give background on some of
these regimes. The appendices give conversion factors, atmosphere properties,
and a summary of key equations. The chapters begins with analysis of simpli
fied idealized flight trajectories, then treats more complex flight path condi
tions, and discusses various flying vehicles.
4.1. GRAVITY-FREE, DRAG-FREE SPACE FLIGHT
This simple rocket flight analysis applies to an outer space environment, where
there is no air (thus no drag) and essentially no significant gravitational attrac
tion. The flight direction is the same as the thrust direction (along the axis of
the nozzle), namely, a one-dimensional, straight-line acceleration path; the
propellant mass flow riz, and thus the thrust F, remain constant for the pro
pellant burning duration tr For a constant propellant flow the flow rate is
mp/lp, where mp is the total usable propellant mass. From Newton's second law
and for an instantaneous vehicle mass m and a vehicle velocity u.
102
4.1. GRAVITY-FREE, DRAG-FREE SPACE FLIGHT 103
F = m du/dt (4-1)
For a rocket where the propellant flow rate is constant the instantaneous mass
of the vehicle m can be expressed as a function of the initial mass of the full
vehicle m0, mp, tp, and the instantaneous time t.
(4-2)
(4-3)
Equation 4--3 expresses the vehicle mass in a form useful for trajectory
calculations. The vehicle mass ratio l\'R and the propellant mass fraction {
have been defined by Eqs. 2-7 and 2-8. They are related by
{=l-1\'R (4-4)
A definition of the various masses is shown in Fig. 4--1. The initial mass at
takeoff m0 equals the sum of the useful propellant mass mp plus the empty or
final vehicle mass m ; m in turn equals the sum of the inert masses of the
1 1
engine system (such as nozzles, tanks, cases, or unused, residual propellant),
plus the guidance, control, electronics, and related equipment, and the pay
load.
t I
I
Payload fflpl I
I
Propellant
mass
tmp
<=-~=Guidance, telemeter~'!l-~----~ I
and control I
equipment I
,,=:~::. ••
Propellant
L
m,::s ''""'
m, oil " l~ded. :,:~':,
propulsion empty
r--~
ystem mass vehicle
~=~-~~--~,.,.,,.
m1
Tanks, structure,
residual propellant t Empty
propulsion
Engine system
Rocket engine
mass mass
FIGURE 4-1. Definitions of various vehicle masses.
104 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
m
For constant propellant flow and a finite propellant burning time the total
propellant mass mp is mtp and the instantaneous vehicle mass m = m 0 - mt.
Equation 4--1 can be written as
du= (F/m)dt = (cm/m) dt
(cm) dt c(mp/tp) dt
m 0 - mpt/tp m0(1 - mpt/motp)
Integration leads to the maximum vehicle velocity at propellant burnout up
that can be attained in a gravity-free vacuum. When u =I= 0 it is often called the
0
velocity increment /";.u.
/";.u = -c In(! - {) + u = c ln(m /m1) + uo (4 --5)
0 0
If the initial velocity u is assumed to be zero, then
0
up = /";.u = -cln(l - {) = -cln[m 0/(m 0 - mp)]
= -clnl\R = cln(l/1\R) (4--{j)
= c ln(m 0/m 1)
This is the maximum velocity increment /";.u that can be obtained in a gravity
free vacuum with constant propellant flow, starting from rest with u = 0. The
0
effect of variations in c, I.,, and { on the flight velocity increment are shown in
Fig. 4--2. An alternate way to write Eq. 4--6 uses e, the base of the natural
logarithm.
e !).u/c = 1/1 a1.ID n = m / ml (4 --7)
0
The concept of the maximum attainable flight velocity increment /";.u in a
gravity-free vacuum is useful in understanding the influence of the basic para
meters. It is used in comparing one propulsion system or vehicle with another,
one flight mission with another, or one proposed upgrade with another possible
design improvement.
From Eq. 4--6 it can be seen that propellant mass fraction has a logarithmic
effect on the vehicle velocity. By increasing this ratio from 0.80 to 0.90, the
interplanetary maximum vehicle velocity in gravitationless vacuum is increased
by 43%. A mass fraction of 0.80 would indicate that only 20% of the total
vehicle mass is available for structure, skin, payload, propulsion hardware,
radios, guidance system, aerodynamic lifting surfaces, and so on; the remaining
80% is useful propellant. It requires careful design to exceed 0.85; mass frac
tion ratios approaching 0.95 appear to be the probable practical limit for
single-stage vehicles and currently known materials. When the mass fraction
is 0.90, then l\R = 0.1 and 1/1\R = 10.0. This marked influence of mass frac
tion or mass ratio on the velocity at power cutoff, and therefore also the range,
4.1. GRAVITY-FREE, DRAG-FREE SPACE FLIGHT 105
Specific impulse, sec
200 400 700
125,000°
2<Q< I. ))) 100,000 ,,,< :Yo, °> 30,000 i< Qi. ))
~ ,;-\, ~
· ~c >Q:: );
75,000 "'">
::-'tic~
,
o
20,000
Q
;<0. ))
~Q) ,$-'ft ~
.,:: ~ .,::
>Q) 50,000 -,::.'ft Q>)
E Q'l, E
:::, 'x'o :::,
E 10,000 -~
·;;:
::";;'; 25,000 ::";;';
0o
5,00010,00015,000 20,000 ft/sec
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 m/sec
Average effective exhaust velocity
120,000
11106
110,000 I \ .,...,..~ C, ...........
~
< Q. )) 100,000 ~. -; :: ,, .c, ,e.,s .... ,- 30,000 ~
~ 90,000 t----~1--,- ·,~·~ -~ ii
.·~ c,::; 80,000 - C,; i_ °_ ~$ ;,/ soO sec -i- ~
0 > 70,000 _0 ' i; ... -~ r1 .1 ~\01 0 s e -c-- 20,000 ~ ;Q )
~ .Q Q, >:) ): 6 50 0, ,0 00 00
0
,,~11 i1 .,1 ,' [; ,_ ... . _... ..
.
.
.
..II
+
l_
n
l -3b6 ~
I I_
-
_
~ . Q, >: ):
· ::;
"E E: ;:
;
;:
':
;, 34 00, ,0 00 00
0
II ,~ ... .. .. .. .. ..
,.....--
1•
s
::: 200 sec
10,000 -
::E :
"~
;:: ;',
;
20,000
~
10,000
0o
20 40 60 80100120140160180
Mass ratio mofmr= llfvR
FIGURE 4-2. Maximum vehicle velocity in a gravitationless, drag-free space for dif
ferent mass ratios and specific impulses (plot of Eq. 4-6). Single-state vehicles can have
values of 1/~ up to about 20 and multistage vehicles can exceed 200.
not only is true of interplanetary spaceships in a vacuum but applies to almost
all types of rocket-powered vehicles. For this reason, importance is placed on
saving inert mass on every vehicle component, including the propulsion system.
Equation 4-6 can be modified and solved for the effective propellant mass
mp required to achieve a desired velocity increment for a given initial takeoff
106 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
mass or a final burnout mass of the vehicle. The final mass consists of the
payload, the structural mass of the vehicle, the empty propulsion system mass
(which includes residual propellant), plus a small additional mass for guidance,
communications, and control devices. Here mp= m 0 - m1.
(4-8)
The flight velocity increment up is proportional to the effective exhaust
velocity c and, therefore, to the specific impulse. Thus any improvement in Is
(such as better propellants, more favorable nozzle area ratio, or higher cham
ber pressure) reflects itself in improved vehicle performance, provided that such
an improvement does not also cause an excessive increase in rocket propulsion
system inert mass, which causes a decrease in the effective propellant fraction.
4.2. FORCES ACTING ON A VEHICLE IN THE ATMOSPHERE
The external forces commonly acting on vehicles flying in the earth's atmo
sphere are thrust, aerodynamic forces, and gravitational attractions. Other
forces, such as wind or solar radiation pressure, are small and generally can
be neglected for many simple calculations.
The thrust is the force produced by the power plant, such as a propeller or a
rocket. It usually acts in the direction of the axis of the power plant, that is,
along the propeller shaft axis or the rocket nozzle axis. The thrust force of a
rocket with constant mass flow has been expressed by Eq. 2~6 as a function of
the effective exhaust velocity c and the propellant flow rate m. In many rockets
m
the mass rate of propellant consumption is essentially constant, and the
starting and stopping transients are usually very short and can be neglected.
Therefore, the thrust is
(4-9)
As explained in Chapter 3, for a given propellant the value of the effective
exhaust velocity c or specific impulse Is depends on the nozzle area ratio and
the altitude. The value of c can increase by a relatively small factor of between
1.2 and 1.6 as altitude is increased.
The drag D is the aerodynamicforce in a direction opposite to the flight path
due to the resistance of the body to motion in a fluid. The lift L is the aero
dynamic force acting in a direction normal to the flight path. They are
expressed as functions of the flight speed u, the mass density of the fluid in
which the vehicle moves p, and a typical surface area A.
L = CdpAu2 (4-10)
D = CD!pAu2 (4-11)
4.2. FORCES ACTING ON A VEHICLE IN THE ATMOSPHERE 107
CL and CD are lift and drag coefficients, respectively. For airplanes and winged
missiles the area A is understood to mean the wing area. For wingless missiles
or space launch vehicles it is the maximum cross-sectional area normal to the
missile axis. The lift and drag coefficients are primarily functions of the vehicle
configuration, flight Mach number, and angle of attack, which is the angle
between the vehicle axis (or the wing plane) and the flight direction. For low
flight speeds the effect of Mach number may be neglected, and the drag and lift
coefficients are functions of the angle of attack. The variation of the drag and
lift coefficients for a typical supersonic missile is shown in Fig. 4--3. The values
of these coefficients reach a maximum near a Mach number of unity. For
wingless vehicles the angle of attack a is usually very small (0 < a < 1° ). The
density and other properties of the atmosphere are listed in Appendix 2. The
density of the earth's atmosphere can vary by a factor up to two (for altitudes
of 300 to 1200 km) depending on solar activity and night-to-day temperature
variations. This introduces a major unknown in the drag. The aerodynamic
forces are affected by the flow and pressure distribution of the rocket exhaust
gases, as explained in Chapter 18.
For space launch vehicles and ballistic missiles the drag loss, when expressed
in terms of !1u, is typically 5 to 10% of the final vehicle velocity increment. This
relatively low value is due to the fact that the air density is low at high altitudes,
when the velocity is high, and at low altitudes the air density is high but the
flight velocity and thus the dynamic pressure are low.
Gravitational attraction is exerted upon a flying space vehicle by all planets,
stars, the moon, and the sun. Gravity forces pull the vehicle in the direction of
the center of mass of the attracting body. Within the immediate vicinity of the
earth, the attraction of other planets and bodies is negligibly small compared to
the earth's gravitational force. This force is the weight.
If the variation of gravity with the geographical features and the oblate
shape of the earth are neglected, the acceleration of gravity varies inversely
as the square of the distance from the earth's center. If R is the radius of the
0
earth's surface and g the acceleration on the earth's surface at the earth's
0
effective radius R 0, the gravitational attraction g is
g = g 0(R 0/ R)2
(4--12)
= g [R /(R + h)]2
0 0 0
where his the altitude. At the equator the earth's radius is 6378.388 km and the
standard value of g 0 is 9.80665 m/sec2 • At a distance as far away as the moon,
the earth's gravity acceleration is only about 3.3 x 10-4 g 0.
108 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
0.8 ,
I '\
0.7 ,,
I I'\.
\.. I
I :-,,...
1, ,,\. ' ro-3'..~10°-
~ I I/ 'I I. '" \ ' '\ "i. ... .. ... . ,_ ~.... 6.i •.. e -I - ..... .... -..... ,.. _.... -r-......_ -- ..... I
1./ I ...... ' ---
-,_- .....
~- J i. ..... i,...
-- .. J O•
0.1
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Mach number, M
...I-..... .....
2.00 ~ .,....
' I
I'\.. I I
I I ~ I
I'..
......
I" I I I
1.50 I'" ..... 'f' I' ..... I
- """'- .... ~ --
r.... I'
-- - "'""'- ....Q. ~Io•
r ..... I
:- ... ,......_
.... ......
....
I
~ -- 8- ·
... ,_, __
--
--
I- - r-,,...._ 6• .....
,,lo" -i- I I
--
0.50 4•
I I
-
2•
I
0
0 2 3 4 5 6
Mach number, M
FIGURE 4-3. Variation of lift and drag coefficient with Mach number of the German
V-2 missile based on body cross-sectional area with jet off and without exhaust plume
effects at several angles of attack a.
4.3. BASIC RELATIONS OF MOTION
For a vehicle that flies within the proximity of the earth, the gravitational
attraction of all other heavenly bodies may usually be neglected. Let it be
assumed that the vehicle is moving in rectilinear equilibrium flight and that
all control forces, lateral forces, and moments that tend to turn the vehicle are
4.3. BASIC RELATIONS OF MOTION 109
zero. The trajectory is two-dimensional and is contained in a fixed plane. The
vehicle has wings that are inclined to the flight path at an angle of attack a and
that give a lift in a direction normal to the flight path. The direction of flight
does not coincide with the direction of thrust. Figure 4-4 shows these condi
tions schematically.
e
Let be the angle of the flight path with the horizontal and ijJ the angle of
the direction of thrust with the horizontal. In the direction of the flight path the
product of the mass and the acceleration has to equal the sum of all forces,
namely the propulsive, aerodynamic, and gravitational forces:
m(du/dt) = Fcos(ijf- e) - D - mg sine (4-13)
The acceleration perpendicular to the flight path is u(d8/dt); for a constant
value of u and the instantaneous radius R of the flight path it is u2 / R. The
equation of motion in a direction normal to the flight velocity is
mu(d8/dt) = F sin(ijf-e) + L - mgcose (4-14)
By substituting from Equations 4-10 and 4-11, these two basic equations can
be solved for the accelerations as
-du = -F c os(ijf-e) - -C pn u2 A - gsm. e (4-15)
dt m 2m
de F . cL 2
u-= -sm(ijf- e) +-pu A - gcose (4-16)
dt m 2m
e,
No general solution can be given to these equations, since tp, u, Cn, CL,P, or
1/1 can vary independently with time, mission profile, or altitude. Also, Cn and
CL are functions of velocity or Mach number. In a more sophisticated analysis
other factors may be considered, such as the propellant used for non propulsive
purposes (e.g., attitude control or flight stability). See Refs. 4-1 to 4-5 for a
FIGURE 4-4. Two-dimensional free-body force diagram for flying vehicle with wings
and fins.
110 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
background of flight performance in some of the flight regimes. Different flight
performance parameters are maximized or optimized for different rocket flight
missions or flight regimes, such as !::i.u, range, time-to-target, or altitude.
Rocket propulsion systems are usually tailored to fit specific flight missions.
Equations 4-15 and 4-16 are general and can be further simplified for
various special applications, as shown in subsequent sections. Results of
such iterative calculations of velocity, altitude, or range using the above two
basic equations often are adequate for rough design estimates. For actual
trajectory analyses, navigation computation, space-flight path determination,
or missile-firing tables, this two-dimensional simplified theory does not permit
sufficiently accurate results. The perturbation effects, such as those listed in
Section 4.6 of this chapter, must then be considered in addition to drag and
gravity, and digital computers are necessary to handle the complex relations.
An arbitrary division of the trajectory into small elements and a step-by-step or
numerical integration to define a trajectory are usually indicated. The more
generalized three-body theory includes the gravitational attraction among
three masses (for example, the earth, the moon, and the space vehicle) and is
considered necessary for many space-flight problems (see Refs. 4-2 and 4-3).
When the propellant flow and the thrust are not constant, the form and the
solution to the equations above become more complex.
A form of Eqs. 4-15 and 4-16 can also be used to determine the actual
thrust or actual specific impulse during actual vehicle flights from accurately
observed trajectory data, such as from optical or radar tracking data. The
vehicle acceleration (du/dt) is essentially proportional to the net thrust and,
by making an assumption or measurement on the propellant flow (which
usually varies in a predetermined manner) and an analysis of aerodynamic
forces, it is possible to determine the rocket propulsion system's actual thrust
under flight conditions.
When integrating Eqs. 4-15 and 4-16 one can obtain actual histories of
velocities and distances traveled and thus complete trajectories. The more
general case requires six equations; three for translation along each of three
perpendicular axes and three for rotation about these axes. The choice of
coordinate systems and the reference points can simplify the mathematical
solutions (see Refs. 4-2 and 4-4).
For a wingless rocket projectile, a space launch vehicle, or a missile with
constant thrust and propellant flow, these equations can be simplified. In Fig.
e
4-5 the flight direction is the same as the thrust direction and lift forces for a
symmetrical, wingless, stably flying vehicle can be assumed to be zero of zero
angle of attack. For a two-dimensional trajectory in a single plane (no wind
forces) and a stationary earth, the acceleration in the direction of flight is as
follows:
du
(4-17)
dt
4.3. BASIC RELATIONS OF MOTION 111
/
Q__ ---------- ------
,-- ____ 1___
Horizontal reference
'
' mg Fsin (} mg
F 0 F 0
________________ jI
D
'-----------y--:
F cos O : Net force
I
FIGURE 4-5. Simplified free-body force diagram for vehicle without wings or fins. The
force vector diagram shows the net force on the vehicle.
A force vector diagram in Fig. 4--5 shows the net force (by adding thrust, drag
and gravity vectors) to be at an angle to the flight path, which will be curved.
These types of diagram form the basis for iterative trajectory numerical solu
tions.
The relationships in this Section 4.3 are for a two-dimensional flight path,
one that lies in a single plane. If maneuvers out of that plane are also made
(e.g., due to solar attraction, thrust misalignment, or wind) then the flight paths
become three-dimensional and another set of equations will be needed to
describe these flights. Reference 4--1 describes equations for the motion of
rocket projectiles in the atmosphere in three dimensions. It requires energy
and forces to push a vehicle out of its flight plane. Trajectories have to be
calculated accurately in order to reach the intended flight objective and today
almost all are done with the aid of a computer. A good number of computer
programs for analyzing flight trajectories exit and are maintained by aerospace
companies or Government agencies. Some are two-dimensional, relatively sim
ple, and are used for making preliminary estimates or comparisons of alter
native flight paths, alternative vehicle designs, or alternative propulsion
schemes. Several use a stationary flat earth, while others use a rotating curved
earth. Three-dimensional programs also exit, are used for more accurate flight
path analyses, include some or all perturbations, orbit plane changes, or flying
at angles of attack. As explained in Ref. 4--3, they are more complex.
If the flight trajectory is vertical (as for a sounding rocket), Eq. 4--17 is the
same, except that sine= 1.0, namely
112 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
2
du c{/tp CD!pu A/mo
(4 --18)
dt 1-{t/tp-g- 1-{t/tp
The velocity at the end of burning can be found by integrating between the
limits of t = 0 and t = tP when u = u and u = up- The first two terms can
0
readily be integrated. The last term is of significance only if the vehicle spends
a considerable portion of its time within the atmosphere. It can be integrated
graphically or by numerical methods, and its value can be designated as
BCDA/m such that
0
11P l pu2
B = 2 dt
0 1-{t/tp
The cutoff velocity or velocity at the end of propellant burning up is then
_ _ BCDA
u = -c In( I - {) - gt - --+ u (4 --19)
P P mo 0
where u is the initial velocity, such as may be given by a booster, g is an
0
average gravitational attraction evaluated with respect to time and altitude
from Eq. 4--12, and c is a time average of the effective exhaust velocity,
which is a function of altitude.
There are always a number of trade-offs in selecting the best trajectory for a
rocket projectile. For example, there is a trade-off between burning time, drag,
payload, maximum velocity, and maximum altitude (or range). Reference 4--6
describes the trade-offs between payload, maximum altitude, and flight stabi
lity for a sounding rocket.
If aerodynamic forces outside the earth's atmosphere are neglected (operate
in a vacuum) and no booster or means for attaining an initial velocity (u = 0)
0
is assumed, the velocity at the end of the burning reached in a vertically
ascending trajectory will be
uP = -cln(l - {) - gtP
=
-clnl\R - gtp (4--20)
= cln(l/1\R) - gtP
The first term is usually the largest and is identical to Eq. 4--6. It is directly
proportional to the effective rocket exhaust velocity and is very sensitive to
changes in the mass ratio. The second term is always negative during ascent,
but its magnitude is small if the burning time tP is short or if the flight takes
place in high orbits or in space where g is comparatively small.
For a flight that is not following a vertical path, the gravity loss is a function
of the angle between the flight direction and the local horizontal; more speci
fically, the gravity loss is the integral of g sine dt, as shown by Eq. 4--15.
4.3. BASIC RELATIONS OF MOTION 113
For the simplified two-dimensional case the net acceleration a for vertical
takeoff at sea level is
a = (Fogo/wo) - go (4-21)
a/g 0 = (F 0/w 0) - I (4-22)
where a/g is the initial takeoff acceleration in multiples of the sea level grav
0
itational acceleration g 0, and F 0/w 0 is the thrust-to-weight ratio at takeoff. For
large surface-launched vehicles, this initial-thrust-to-initial-weight ratio has
values between 1.2 and 2.2; for small missiles (air-to-air, air-to-surface, and
surface-to-air types) this ratio is usually larger, sometimes even as high as 50 or
100. The final or terminal acceleration a of a vehicle in vertical ascent usually
1
occurs just before the rocket engine is shut off and before the propellant is
completely consumed.
(4-23)
In a gravity-free environment this equation becomes a /g = F /w . In rockets
1 0 1 1
with constant propellant flow the final acceleration is usually also the max
imum acceleration, because the vehicle mass to be accelerated has its minimum
value just before propellant exhaustion, and for ascending rockets the thrust
usually increases with altitude. If this terminal acceleration is too large (and
causes overstressing of the structure, thus necessitating an increase in structure
mass), then the thrust can be designed to a lower value for the last portion of
the burning period.
Example 4-1. A simple single-stage rocket for a rescue flare has the following charac
teristics and its flight path nomenclature is shown in the sketch.
Launch weight 4.0 !bf
Useful propellant mass 0.4 lbm
Effective specific impulse 120 sec
Launch angle (relative to horizontal) 80°
Burn time (with constant thrust) 1.0 sec
Xp Xz Xf
114 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
Drag is to be neglected, since the flight velocities are low. Assume no wind. Assume the
local acceleration of gravity to be equal to the sea level g and invariant throughout the
0
flight.
Solve for the initial and final acceleration of powered flight, the maximum trajectory
height, the time to reach maximum height, the range or distance to impact, and the
angle at propulsion cutoff and at impact.
SOLUTION. Divide the flight path into three portions: the powered flight for I sec, the
unpowered ascent after cutoff, and the free-fall descent. The thrust is obtained from Eq.
2-5:
F = lsw/tp = 120 x 0.4/1 = 48 !bf
The initial accelerations along the x and y directions are, from Eq. 4.22,
(a )y = g [(F sin &/w) - I] = 32.2[(48/4) sin 80° - I] = 348 ft/ sec2
0 0
(ao)x = g (F/w)cose = 32.2(48/4)cos80° = 67.1 ft/sec2
0
The initial acceleration in the flight direction is
Go = j(ao)~ + (ao);. = 354.4 ft/ sec2
The direction of thrust and the flight path are the same. The vertical and horizontal
components of the velocity up at the end of powered flight is obtained from Eq. 4-20.
The vehicle mass has been diminished by the propellant that has been consumed.
(up)y = cln( w0/w 1) sine - g0tP = 32.2 x 120 In( 4/3.6)0.984 - 32.2 = 375 ft/ sec
(up)x = cln(w0/w1) cos e = 32.2 x 120 ln(4/3.6)0. I 736 = 70.7 ft/ sec
The trajectory angle with the horizontal at rocket cutoff for a dragless flight is
tan-1(375/70.7) = 79.3°
Final acceleration is a 1 = Fg 0/w = 48 x 32.2/3.6 = 429 ft/sec2 . For the short duration
of the powered flight the coordinates at propulsion burnout Yp and Xp can be calculated
approximately by using an average velocity (50% of maximum) for the powered flight.
= =! =
Yp !(up)ylp X 375 X 1.0 !87.5 ft
Xp = ! (up)xlp = ! x 70. 7 x 1.0 = 35.3 ft
The unpowered part of the trajectory has a zero vertical velocity at its zenith. The initial
velocities, the x and y values for this parabolic trajectory segment, are those of propul
sion termination (F = 0, u = up, x = xp, y = Y p); at the zenith (uy)z = 0.
4.4. EFFECT OF PROPULSION SYSTEM ON VEHICLE PERFORMANCE 115
At this zenith sin e = 1.0. Solving for lz yields
lz =Ip+ (up);/g0 =I+ 375/32.2 = 12.6 sec
The trajectory maximum height or zenith can be determined:
Yz = Yp + (up)ilz - Ip) - !go(lz - lp)2
= 187.5 + 375(11.6) - p2.2(11.6)2 = 2370 ft
The range during ascent to the zenith point is
Xz = (up)x(tz - Ip)+ XP
= 70.7 x I 1.6 + 35.3 = 855 ft
The time of flight for the descent is, using Yz = !g t2,
0
I= J2yz/g 0 = J2 x 2370/32.2 = 12.l sec
The final range or x distance to the impact point is found by knowing that the initial
horizontal velocity at the zenith (uz)x is the same as the horizontal velocity at propulsion
termination (up)x:
Xj = (up)x{lctescent) = 70.7 X 12.1 = 855 ft
The total range for ascent and descent is 855 + 855 = 1710. The time to impact is
12.6 + 12.1 = -24.7 sec. The vertical component of the impact or final velocity u 1 is
uf = go(tf - 1.) = 32.2 x 12. I = 389.6 ft/ sec
e
The impact angle can be found:
1
e = tan-1(389.6/70.7) = 79.7°
1
If drag had been included, it would have required an iterative solution for finite elements
of the flight path and all velocities and distances would be somewhat lower in value. A
set of flight trajectories for a sounding rocket is given in Ref. 4-5.
4.4. EFFECT OF PROPULSION SYSTEM ON VEHICLE
PERFORMANCE
This section gives several methods for improving flight vehicle performance.
Most of these enhancements, listed below, are directly influenced by the selec
tion or design of the propulsion system. A few of the flight vehicle performance
improvements do not depend on the propulsion system. Most of those listed
below apply to all missions, but some are peculiar to some missions only.
116 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
1. The effective exhaust velocity c or the specific impulse I, usually have a
direct effect on the vehicle's flight performance. For example the vehicle
final velocity increment !:iu can be inceased by a higher I,. This can be
done by using a more energetic propellant (see Chapter 7 and 12), by a
higher chamber pressure and, for upper stages operating at high alti
tudes, also by a larger nozzle area ratio.
2. The mass ratio m /m has a logarithmic effect. It can be increased in
0 1
several ways. One way is by reducing the final mass m , which consists
1
of the inert hardware plus the nonusable, residual propellant mass.
Reducing the inert mass implies lighter structures, smaller payloads,
lighter guidance/control devices, or less unavailable residual propellant;
this means going to stronger structural materials at higher stresses,
more efficient power supplies, or smaller electronic packages. During
design there is always great emphasis to reduce all hardware masses
and the residual propellants to their practical minima. Another way is
to increase the initial mass, namely by increasing the thrust and add
ing more propellant, but with a minimum increase in the structure or
propulsion system masses. It is possible to improve the effective mass
ratio greatly by using two or more stages, as will be explained in
Section 4.7.
3. Reducing the burning time (i.e., increasing the thrust level) will reduce
the gravitational loss. However, the higher acceleration usually requires
more structural and propulsion system mass, which in turn causes the
mass ratio to be less favorable.
4. The drag, which can be considered as a negative thrust, can be reduced in
at least four ways. The drag has several components: (a) The form drag
depends on the aerodynamic shape. A slender pointed nose or sharp, thin
leading edges of fins or wings have less drag than a stubby, blunt shape.
(b) A vehicle with a small cross-sectional area has less drag. A propulsion
design that can be packaged in a long, thin shape will be preferred. (c)
The drag is proportional to the cross-sectional or frontal vehicle area. A
higher propellant density will decrease the propellant volume and there
fore will allow a smaller cross section. (d) The skin drag is caused by the
friction of the air flowing over all the vehicle's outer surfaces. A smooth
contour and a polished surface are usually better. The skin drag is also
influenced by the propellant density, because it gives a smaller volume
and thus a lower surface area. (e) The base drag is the fourth component;
it is a function of the local ambient air pressure acting over the surface of
the vehicle's base or bottom plate. It is influenced by the nozzle exit
design (exit pressure) and the geometry of the vehicle base design. It is
discussed further in Chapter 18.
5. The length of the propulsion nozzle often is a significant part of the
overall vehicle or stage length. As was described in Chapter 3, there is
an optimum nozzle contour and length, which can be determined by
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT 117
trade-off analysis. A shorter nozzle length allows a somewhat shorter
vehicle; on many designs this implies a somewhat lighter vehicle structure
and a slightly better vehicle mass ratio.
6. The final vehicle velocity at propulsion termination can be increased by
increasing the initial velocity u 0. By launching a satellite in an eastward
direction the rotational speed of the earth is added to the final satellite
orbital velocity. This tangential velocity of the earth is about 464 m/sec
or 1523 ft/sec at the equator and about 408 m/sec or 1340 ft/sec for an
easterly launch at Kennedy Space Center (latitude of 28.5° north).
Conversely, a westerly satellite launch has a negative initial velocity
and thus requires a higher-velocity increment. Another way to increase
u is to launch a spacecraft from a satellite or an aircraft, which increases
the initial vehicle velocity and allows launching in the desired direction,
or to launch an air-to-surface missile from an airplane.
7. For vehicles that fly in the atmosphere it is possible to increase the range
when aerodynamic lift is used to counteract gravity and reduce gravity
losses. Using a set of wings or flying at an angle of attack increases the
lift, but is also increases the drag. This lift can also be used to increase the
maneuverability and trajectory flexibility.
8. When the flight velocity u is close to the rocket's effective exhaust velocity
c, the propulsive efficiency is the highest (Eq. 2-23) and more of the
rocket exhaust gas energy is transformed into the vehicle's flight energy.
Trajectories where u is close in value to c for a major portion of the flight
therefore need less propellant.
Several of these influencing parameters can be optimized. Therefore, for
every mission of flight application there is an optimum propulsion system
design and the propulsion parameters that define the optimum condition are
dependent on vehicle or flight parameters.
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT
Newton's law of gravitation defines the attraction of gravitational force Fg
between two bodies in space as follows:
(4-24)
Here G is the universal gravity constant ( G = 6.670 x 10-11 m3 / kg-sec2 ), m 1
and m are the masses of the two attracting bodies (such as the earth and the
2
moon, the earth and a spacecraft, or the sun and a planet) and R is the distance
between their centers of mass. The earth's gravitational constant µ is the
product of Newton's universal constant G and the mass of the earth m
1
(5.974 x 1024 kg). It isµ= 3.98600 x 1014 m3/sec2 .
118 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
The rocket offers a means for escaping the earth for lunar and interplane
tary travel, for escaping our solar system, and for creating a stationary or
moving station in space. The flight velocity required to escape from the earth
can be found by equating the kinetic energy of a moving body to the work
necessary to overcome gravity, neglecting the rotation of the earth and the
attraction of other celestial bodies.
!mu2 =mfg
dR
By substituting for g from Eq. 4-12 and by neglecting air friction the following
relation for the escape velocity is obtained:
(4-25)
Here Ro is the effective earth radius (6374.2 km), h is the orbit altitude above
sea level, and g is the acceleration of gravity at the earth surface (9.806 m/sec).
The spacecraft radius R measured from the earth's center is R = R + h. The
0
velocity of escape at the earth's surface is 11,179 m/sec or 36,676 ft/sec and
does not vary appreciably within the earth's atmosphere, as shown by Fig. 4-6.
Escape velocities for surface launch are given in Table 4-1 for the sun, the
60,000 --
:.E
g0
--
,......i--r I I l I
50
50,000 Orbital energy of satellite
15,000 ' per pound mass
c~ 40
,.... 40,000
~-/
E · ><Z c"u ( 01 : i:5. ' , j) 10,000 " 2a ( (C C~ " u1 1. .; ': : )
)
3 20 0, ,0 00 00
0
i. S/
a
- t.. e... l. l.
i
i te- - v. - e.... l. o_ ~E itys ca- -p -e - vel- o ..c .- -ity ~.,.,,.. ~ i,., ,,.. / - 7 456 . : g;. C :0 : :c : : ; ,:
5,000 1 3 ~
·Z c 0::5 , 10,000 ...... i--Sate_ lliteJ p-
eriod of revolution
2 ·0 "
0
~
~ CL
0
0 10 20 30
Altitude, 106 ft
5 10
Altitude, 106 m
FIGURE 4-6. Orbital energy, orbital velocity, period of revolution, and earth escape
velocity of a space vehicle as a function of altitude for circular satellite orbits. It is based
on a spherical earth and neglects the earth's rotation and atmospheric drag.
TABLE 4-1. Characteristic Data for Several Heavenly Bodies
Acceleration Escape
Mean Radius Mean Relative of Gravity Velocity at
of Orbit Period of Diameter Mass Specific at Surface Surface
Name (million km) Revolution (km) (Earth = 1.0) Gravity (m/sec2 ) (m/sec)
Sun 1,393,000 332,950 1.41 273.4 616,000
Moon 0.383 27.3 days 3475 0.012 3.34 1.58 2380
Mercury 57.87 87.97 days 4670 0.06 5.5 3.67 4200
Venus 108.1 224.70 days 12,400 0.86 5.3 8.67 10,300
Earth 149.6 365.256 days 12,742 1.ooa 5.52 9.806 11, 17 9
Mars 227.7 686.98 days 6760 0.15 3.95 3.749 6400
Jupiter 777.8 11.86 yr 143,000 318.4 1.33 26.0 59,700
Saturn 1486 29.46 yr 121,000 95.2 0.69 11.4 35,400
Uranus 2869 84.0 yr 47,100 15.0 1.7 10.9 22,400
Neptune 4475 164.8 yr 50,700 17.2 1.8 11.9 31,000
Pluto 5899 284.8 yr 5950 0.90 4 7.62 10,000
Source: in part from Refs 4-2 and 4-3.
"Earth mass is 5.976 x 1024 kg .
...
...
U)
120 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
planets, and the moon. Launching from the earth's surface at escape velocity is
not practical. As a vehicle ascends through the earth's atmosphere, it is subject
to severe aerodynamic heating and dynamic pressures. A practical launch
vehicle has to traverse the atmosphere at relatively low velocity and accelerate
to the high velocities beyond the dense atmosphere. For example, during a
portion of the Space Shuttle's ascent, its main engines are actually throttled
to a lower thrust to avoid excessive pressure and heating. Alternatively, an
escape vehicle can be launched from an orbiting space station or from an
orbiting Space Shuttle.
A rocket spaceship can become a satellite of the earth and revolve around
the earth in a fashion similar to that of the moon. Satellite orbits are usually
elliptical and some are circular. Low earth orbits, typically below 500 km
altitude, are designated by the letters LEO. Satellites are useful as communica
tions relay stations for television or radio, weather observation, or reconnais
sance observation. The altitude of the orbit is usually above the earth's
atmosphere, because this minimizes the expending of energy to overcome the
drag which pulls the vehicle closer to the earth. The effects of the radiation in
the Van Allen belt on human beings and sensitive equipment sometimes neces
sitate the selection of an earth orbit at low altitude.
For a circular trajectory the velocity of a satellite must be sufficiently high so
that its centrifugal force balances the earth's gravitational attraction.
2
mus/R = mg
For a circular orbit, the satellite velocity Us is found by using Eq. 4-12,
Us= RoJgo/(Ro + h) = /µfR (4-26)
which is smaller than the escape velocity by a factor of ~- The period r in
seconds of one revolution for a circular orbit relative to a stationary earth is
r = 2n(Ro + h)/us = 2n(Ro + h)312 /(R /i:J (4-27)
0
The energy E necessary to bring a unit of mass into a circular satellite orbit
neglecting drag, consists of kinetic and potential energy, namely,
(4-28)
The escape velocity, satellite velocity, satellite period, and satellite orbital
energy are shown as functions of altitude in Fig. 4-6.
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT 121
A satellite circulating around the earth at an altitude of 300 miles or 482.8
km has a velocity of about 7375 m/sec or 24,200 ft/sec, circles a stationary
earth in 1.63 hr, and ideally requires an energy of 3.35 x 107 J to place 1 kg of
spaceship mass into its orbit. An equatorial satellite in a circular orbit at an
altitude of 6.611 earth radii (about 26,200 miles, 42,200 km, or 22,700 nautical
miles) has a period of revolution of 24 hr. It will appear stationary to an
observer on earth. This is known as a synchronous satellite in geo-synchronous
earth orbit, usually abbreviated as GEO. It is used extensively for communica
tions satellite applications. In Section 4. 7 on launch vehicles we will describe
how the payload of a given space vehicle diminishes as the orbit circular
altitude is increased and as the inclination (angle between orbit plane and
earth equatorial plane) is changed.
Elliptical Orbits
The circular orbit described above is a special case of the more general elliptic
orbit shown in Fig. 4-7; here the earth (or any other heavenly body around
which another body is moving) is located at one of the focal points of this
ellipse. The equations of motion may be derived from Kepler's laws, and the
elliptical orbit can be described as follows, when expressed in polar coordi
nates:
(4-29)
Perigee
---+9'*'7"J- / ~. ~
~-~)'\'-___,__._-------,,--~~--o
Apogee
b
FIGURE 4-7. Elliptical orbit; the attracting body is at one of the focal points of the
ellipse.
122 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
where u is the velocity of the body in the elliptical orbit, R is the instantaneous
radius from the center of the attracting body (a vector quantity, which changes
direction as well as magnitude), a is the major axis of the ellipse, and µ is the
earth's gravitational constant with a value of 3.986 x 1014 m3 / sec2 . The sym
bols are defined in Fig. 4-7. From this equation it can be seen that the velocity
up is a maximum when the moving body comes closest to its focal point at the
orbit's perigee and that its velocity ua is a minimum at its apogee. By substitut
ing for R in Eq. 4-29, and by defining the ellipse's shape factor e as the
eccentricity of the ellipse, e = J a2 - b2 / a, then the apogee and perigee veloci
ties can be expressed as
µ(l - e)
= (4-30)
Ua +
a(l e)
µ(I+ e)
ub = (4-31)
a(l - e)
Another property of an elliptical orbit is that the product of velocity and
instantaneous radius remains constant for any location a or b on the ellipse,
namely, uaRa = ubRb = uR. The exact path that a satellite takes depends on the
velocity (magnitude and vector orientation) with which it is started or injected
into its orbit.
For interplanetary transfers the ideal mission can be achieved with mini
mum energy in a simple transfer ellipse, as suggested originally by Hohmann
(see Ref. 4-6). Assuming the planetary orbits about the sun to be circular and
coplanar, it can be demonstrated that the path of minimum energy is an ellipse
tangent to the planetary orbits as shown in Fig. 4-8. This operation requires a
velocity increment (relatively high thrust) at the initiation and another at ter-
Planet B at t
2
Planet B
at t2
Planet B
at t1 Planet A at t1
FIGURE 4-8. Schematic diagram of interplanetary transfer paths. These same transfer
maneuvers apply when going from a low-altitude earth satellite orbit to a higher orbit.
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT 123
ruination; both increments are the velocity differences between the respective
circular planetary velocities and the perigee and apogee velocity which define
the transfer ellipse. The thrust levels at the beginning and end maneuvers of the
Hohmann ellipse must be high enough to give a short operating time and the
acceleration of at least 0.01 g 0, but preferably more. With electrical propulsion
these accelerations would be about l 0-5 g 0, the operating time would be weeks
or months, and the best transfer trajectories would be very different from a
Hohmann ellipse; they are described in Chapter 19.
The departure date or the relative positions of the launch planet and the target
planet for a planetary transfer mission is critical, because the spacecraft has to
meet with the target planet when it arrives at the target orbit. The Hohmann
transfer time (t 2 - t 1) starting on earth is about 116 hours to go to the moon
and about 259 days to Mars. If a faster orbit (shorter transfer time) is desired
(see dashed lines in Fig. 4---8), it requires more energy than a Hohmann transfer
ellipse. This means a larger vehicle with a larger propulsion system that has
more total impulse. There also is a time window for a launch of a spacecraft
that will make a successful rendezvous. For a Mars mission an earth-launched
spacecraft may have a launch time window of more than two months. A
Hohmann transfer ellipse or a faster transfer path apply not only to planetary
flight but also to earth satellites, when an earth satellite goes from one circular
orbit to another (but within the same plane). Also, if one spacecraft goes to a
rendezvous with another spacecraft in a different orbit, the two spacecraft have
to be in the proper predetermined positions prior to the launch for simulta
neously reaching their rendezvous. When the launch orbit (or launch planet) is
not in the same plane as the target orbit, then additional energy will be needed
by applying thrust in a direction normal to the launch orbit plane.
Example 4-2. A satellite is launched from a circular equatorial parking orbit at an
altitude of 160 km into a coplanar circular synchronous orbit by using a Hohmann
transfer ellipse. Assume a homogeneous spherical earth with a radius of 6374 km.
Determine the velocity increments for entering the transfer ellipse and for achieving
the synchronous orbit at 42,200 km altitude. See Fig. 4-8 for the terminology of the
orbits.
SOLUTION. The orbits are RA = 6.531 x 106 m; RB= 48.571 x 106 m. The major
axis a of the transfer ellipse
The orbit velocities of the two satellites are
UA = J µ/ RA = (3.986005 x 1014 /6.571 x 106]1 = 7788 m/ sec
uB = Jµ/ RB= 2864.7 m/ sec
124 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
The velocities needed to enter and exit the transfer ellipse are
(ue)A = ,Jµ[(2/ RA) - (l/a)]1 = 10,337 m/ sec
1
(u,)s = ,Jµ[(2/ Rs) - (l/a)]112 = 1394 m/ sec
1
The changes in velocity going from parking orbit to ellipse and from ellipse to final orbit
are:
~uA = J(u 1e)A - uA I = 2549 m/ sec
~us= Jus - (u1e)s = 1471 m/ sec
The total velocity change for the transfer maneuvers is:
~Utotal = ~uA + ~us = 4020 m/ sec
Figure 4-9 shows the elliptical transfer trajectory of a ballistic missile or a
satellite ascent vehicle. During the initial powered flight the trajectory angle is
adjusted by the guidance system to an angle that will allows the vehicle to reach
the apogee of its elliptical path exactly at the desired orbit altitude. For the
ideal satellite orbit injection the simplified theory assumes an essentially instan
taneous application of the total impulse as the ballistic trajectory reaches its
apogee or zenith. In reality the rocket propulsion system operates over a finite
time, during which gravity losses and changes in altitude occur.
Deep Space
Lunar and interplanetary m1ss1ons include circumnavigation, landing, and
return flights to the moon, Venus, Mars, and other planets. The energy neces
!mv;
sary to escape from earth can be calculated as from Eq. 4-25. It is
6.26 x 1071/kg, which is more than that required for a satellite. The gravita
tional attraction of various heavenly bodies and their respective escape velo
cities depends on their masses and diameters; approximate values are listed in
Table 4-1. An idealized diagram of an interplanetary landing mission is shown
in Fig. 4-10.
The escape from the solar system requires approximately 5.03 x 108 J/kg.
This is eight times as much energy as is required for escape from the earth.
There is technology to send small, unmanned probes away from the sun to
outer space; as yet there needs to be an invention and demonstrated proof of a
long duration, novel, rocket propulsion system before a mission to the nearest
star can be achieved. The trajectory for a spacecraft to escape from the sun is
either a parabola (minimum energy) or a hyperbola.
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT 125
Local Elliptical ballistic
vertical flight path
\ Horizontal
\ launch plane
\
/\ Satellite circular orbit
I \ I
\ \ Upper limit
\ \ / ' of atmosphere
Planet earth surface
FIGURE 4-9. Long-range ballistic missiles follow an elliptical free-flight trajectory (in a
drag-free flight) with the earth's center as one of the focal points. The surface launch is
usually vertically up (not shown here), but the trajectory is quickly tilted during early
powered flight to enter into the ellipse trajectory. The ballistic range is the arc distance
on the earth's surface. For satellites, another powered flight period occurs (called orbit
injection) just as the vehicle is at its elliptical apogee (as indicated by the velocity arrow),
causing the vehicle to enter an orbit.
Perturbations
This section gives a brief discussion of the disturbing torques and forces which
cause perturbations or deviations from any space flight path or satellite's flight
trajectory. For a more detailed treatment of flight paths and their perturba
tions, see Refs. 4-2 and 4-3. A system is needed to measure the satellite's
position and deviation from the intended flight path, to determine the needed
periodic correction maneuver and then to counteract, control, and correct
them. Typically, the corrections are performed by a set of small reaction con
trol thrusters which provide predetermined total impulses into the desired
directions. These corrections are needed throughout the life of the spacecraft
(for 1 to 20 years) to overcome the effects of the disturbances and maintain the
intended flight regime.
126 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
Operation of retro rocket
to slow vehicle down
to satellite velocity (1-5%)
Vertical launch and
turn (100%)
Kick maneuvers and
Retro-rocket maneuver
powered ascent (20%)
Acceleration to de-orbit into a landing
maneuver to attain approach (1-5%)
interplanetary
orbit (1-10%) Transfer maneuver to earth
equatorial orbit (5-20%)
Coast in orbit
FIGURE 4-10. Schematic diagram of typical powered flight maneuvers during a
hypothetical interplanetary mission with a landing. The numbers indicate typical thrust
magnitudes of the maneuvers in percent of launch takeoff thrust. This is not drawn to
scale. Heavy lines show powered flight segments.
Perturbations can be cateogirzed as short-term and long-term. The daily or
orbital period oscillating forces are called diurnal and those with long periods
are called secular.
High-altitude each satellites (36,000 km and higher) experience perturbing
forces primarily as gravitational pull from the sun and the moon, with the
forces acting in different directions as the satellite flies around the earth.
This third-body effect can increase or decrease the velocity magnitude and
change its direction. In extreme cases the satellite can come very close to the
third body, such as the moon, and undergo what is called a hyperbolic man
euver that will radically change the trajectory. This encounter can be used to
increase or decrease the energy of the satellite and intentionally change the
velocity and the shape of the orbit.
Medium- and low-altitude satellites (500 to 35,000 km) experience perturba
tions because of the earth's oblateness. The earth bulges in the vicinity of the
equator and a cross section through the poles is not entirely circular.
Depending on the inclination of the orbital plane to the earth equator and
the altitude of the satellite orbit, two perturbations result: (1) the regression of
the nodes, and (2) shifting of the apsides line (major axis). Regression of the
nodes is shown in Fig. 4-11 as a rotation of the plane of the orbit in space, and
it can be as high as 9° per day at relatively low altitudes. Theoretically, regres
sion does not occur in equatorial orbits.
Figure 4-12 shows an exaggerated shift of the apsidal line, with the center of
the earth remaining as a focus point. This perturbation may be visualized as the
movement of the prescribed elliptical orbit in a fixed plane. Obviously, both the
apogee and perigee points change in position, the rate of change being a func-
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT 127
FIGURE 4-11. The regression of nodes is shown as a rotation of the plane of the orbit.
The direction of the movement will be opposite to the east~west components of the
earth's satellite motion.
tion of the satellite altitude and plane inclination angle. At an apogee altitude
of 1000 nautical miles (n.m.) and a perigee of 100 n.m. in an equatorial orbit,
the apsidal drift is approximately 10° per day.
Satellites of modern design, with irregular shapes due to protruding anten
nas, solar arrays, or other asymmetrical appendages, experience torques and
forces that tend to perturb the satellite's position and orbit throughout its
orbital life. The principal torques and forces result from the following factors:
FIGURE 4-12. Shifting of the apsidal line of an elliptic orbit from position l to 2
because of the oblateness of the earth.
128 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
I. Aerodynamic drag. This factor is significant at orbital altitudes below 500
km and is usually assumed to cease at 800 km above the earth. Reference
4-7 gives a detailed discussion of aerodynamic drag which, in addition to
affecting the attitude of unsymmetrical vehicles, causes a change in ellip
tical orbits known as apsidal drift, a decrease in the major axis, and a
decrease in eccentricity of orbits about the earth.
2. Solar radiation. This factor dominates at high altitudes (above 800 km)
and is due to impingement of solar photons upon satellite surfaces. The
solar radiation pressure p (N/m2 ) on a given surface of the satellite in the
vicinity of the earth exposed to the sun can be determined as
p = 4.5 x I o-6 cos 11[( I - ks) cos e + 0.67 kd] (4--32)
e
where is the angle (degrees) between the incident radiation vector and
the normal to the surface, and ks and kd are the specular and diffuse
coefficients of reflectivity. Typical values are 0.9 and 0.5, respectively, for
ks and kd on the body and antenna, and 0.25 and 0.01 respectively, for ks
and kd with solar array surfaces. The radiation intensity varies as the
square of the distance from the sun (see Ref. 4-8). The torque T on the
vehicle is given by T = pAl, where A is the projected area and l is the
offset distance between the spacecraft's center of gravity and the center of
solar pressure.
3. Gravity gradients. Gravitational torque in spacecraft results from a var
iation in the gravitational force on the distributed mass of a spacecraft.
Determination of this torque requires knowledge of the gravitational
field and the distribution of spacecraft mass. This torque decreases as a
function of the orbit radius and increases with the offset distances of
masses within the spacecraft (including booms and appendages), it is
most significant in large spacecraft or space stations operating in rela
tively low orbits (see Ref. 4-9).
4. Magnetic field. The earth's magnetic field and any magnetic moment
within the satellite interact to produce torque. The earth's magnetic
field precesses about the earth's axis but is very weak (0.63 and 0.31
gauss at poles and equator, respectively). This field is continually fluctu
ating in direction and intensity because of magnetic storms and other
influences. Since the field strength decreases with I/ R3 with the orbital
altitude, magnetic field forces are often neglected in the preliminary
design of satellites (see Ref. 4-10).
5. Internal accelerations. Deployment of solar array panels, the shifting of
propellant, movement of astronauts or other mass within the satellite, or
the "unloading" of reaction wheels produce torques and forces.
We can categorize satellite propulsion needs according to function as listed
in Table 4-2, which shows the total impulse "budget" applicable to a typical
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT 129
TABLE 4.2. Propulsion Functions and Total Impulse Needs of a
2000-lbm Geosynchronous Satellite with a 7-Year Life
Total Impulse
Function (N-sec)
Acquisition of orbit 20,000
Attitude control (rotation) 4,000
Station keeping, E-W 13,000
Station keeping, N-S 270,000
Repositioning (1'1u, 200 ft/sec) 53,000
Control apsidal drift (third body attraction) 445,000
Deorbit 12,700
Total 817,700
high altitude, elliptic orbit satellite. The control system designer often distin
guishes two different kinds of stationary-keeping orbit corrections needed to
keep the satellite in a synchronous position. The east-west correction refers to
a correction that moves the point at which a satellite orbit intersects the earth's
equatorial plane in an east or west direction; it usually corrects forces caused
largely by the oblateness of the earth. The north-south correction counteracts
forces usually connected with the third-body effects of the sun and the moon.
In many satellite missions the gradual changes in orbit caused by perturba
tion forces are not of concern. However, in certain missions it is necessary to
compensate for these perturbing forces and maintain the satellite in a specific
orbit and in a particular position in that orbit. For example, a synchronous
communications satellite in a GEO needs to maintain its position and its orbit,
so it will be able to (I) keep covering a specific area of the earth or commu
nicate with the same stations on earth within its line of sight, and (2) not
become a hazard to other satellites in this densely occupied synchronous equa
torial orbit. Another example is a LEO communications satellite system with
several coordinated satellites; here at least one satellite has to be in a position
to receive and transmit RF signals to specific points on earth. Their orbits, and
the positions of these several satellites with respect to each other, need to be
controlled and maintained (see Refs. 4----11 to 4----13).
Orbit maintenance means applying small correcting forces and torques per
iodically; for GEO it is typically every few months. Typical velocity increments
for the orbit maintenance of synchronous satellites require a !::,,.u between 10
and 50 m/sec per year. For a satellite mass of about 2000 kg a 50 m/sec
correction for a IO-year orbit life would need a total impulse of about
100,000 N-sec, which corresponds to a propellant mass of 400 to 500 kg
(about a quarter of the satellite mass) if done by a small monopropellant or
bipropellant thrust. It would require much less propellant if electrical propul
sion were used, but in some spacecraft the inert mass of the power supply
would increase.
130 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
Mission Velocity
A convenient way to describe the magnitude of the energy requirement of a
space mission is to use the concept of the mission velocity. It is the sum of all the
flight velocity increments needed to attain the mission objective. In the simpli
fied sketch of a planetary landing mission of Fig. 4-10, it is the sum of all the
!)..u velocity increments shown by the heavy lines (rocket-powered flight seg
ments) of the trajectories. Even though some of the velocity increments were
achieved by retro-action (a negative propulsion force to decelerate the flight
velocity), these maneuvers required energy and their absolute magnitude is
counted in the mission velocity. The initial velocity from the earth's rotation
(464 m/sec at the equator and 408 m/sec at a launch station at 28.5° latitude)
does not have to be provided by the vehicle's propulsion systems. For example,
the required mission velocity for launching at Cape Kennedy, bringing the
space vehicle into an orbit at 110 km, staying in orbit for a while, and then
entering a de-orbit maneuver has the !)..u components shown in Table 4-3.
The required mission velocity is the sum of the absolute values of all trans
lation velocity increments that have forces going through the center of gravity
of the vehicle (including turning maneuvers) during the flight of the mission. It
is the theoretical hypothetical velocity that can be attained by the vehicle in a
gravity-free vacuum, if all the propulsive energy of the momentum-adding
thrust chambers in all stages were to be applied in the same direction. It is
useful for comparing one flight vehicle design with another and as an indicator
of the mission energy.
The required mission velocity has to be equal to the "supplied" mission
velocity, that is, the sum of all the velocity increments provided by the propul
sion systems of each of the various vehicle stages. The total velocity increment
to be "supplied" by the shuttle's propulsion systems for the shuttle mission
described below (solid rocket motor strap-on boosters, main engines and, for
orbit injection, also the increment from the orbital maneuvering system-all
shown in Fig. 1-13) has to equal or exceed 9621 m/sec. With chemical propul
sion systems and a single stage, we can achieve a space mission velocity of 4000
TABLE 4-3. Space Shuttle Incremental Flight Velocity Breakdown
Ideal satellite velocity 7790 m/sec
!).u to overcome gravity losses 1220 m/sec
!).u to turn the flight path from the vertical 360 m/sec
!).u to counteract aerodynamic drag 118 m/sec
Orbit injection 145 m/sec
Deorbit maneuver to re-enter atmosphere and aerodynamic braking 60 m/sec
Correction maneuvers and velocity adjustments 62 m/sec
Initial velocity provided by the earth's rotation at 28.5° latitude -408 m/sec
Total required mission velocity 9347 m/sec
4.5. SPACE FLIGHT 131
to 13,000 m/sec, depending on the payload, vehicle design, and propellant.
With two stages it can be between perhaps 12,000 and 22,000 m/sec.
Rotational maneuvers, described later, do not change the flight velocity
and are not usually added to the mission velocity requirements. Also, main
taining a satellite in orbit against long-term perturbing forces (see prior sec
tion) is often not counted as part of the mission velocity. However, the
designers need to provide additional propulsion capability and propellants
for these purposes. These are often separate propulsion systems, called reac
tion control systems.
Typical vehicle velocities required for various interplanetary missions have
been estimated as shown in Table 4----4. By starting interplanetary journeys from
a space satellite station, a considerable saving in this vehicle velocity can be
achieved, namely, the velocity necessary to achieve the earth-circling satellite
orbit. As the space-flight objective becomes more ambitious, the mission velo
city is increased. For a given single or multistage vehicle it is possible to
increase the vehicle's terminal velocity, but usually only at the expense of
payload. Table 4-5 shows some typical ranges of payload values for a given
multistage vehicle as a percentage of a payload for a relatively simple earth
orbit. Thus a vehicle capable of putting a substantial payload into a near-earth
orbit can only land a very small fraction of this payload on the moon, since it
has to have additional upper stages, which displace payload mass. Therefore,
much larger vehicles are required for space flights with high mission velocities if
compared to a vehicle of less mission velocity but identical payload. The values
listed in Tables 4----4 and 4-5 are only approximate because they depend on
specific vehicle design features, the propellants used, exact knowledge of the
TABLE 4-4. Vehicle Mission Velocities for Typical Interplanetary Missions
Approximate
Ideal Velocity Actual Velocity
Mission (km/sec) (1000 m/sec)
Satellite orbit around earth 7.9-10 9.1-12.5
(no return)
Escape from earth (no return) 11.2 12.9
Escape from moon 2.3 2.6
Earth to moon (soft landing on moon, 13.1 15.2
no return)
Earth to Mars (soft landing) 17.5 20
Earth to Venus (soft landing) 22 25
Earth to moon (landing on moon 15.9 17.7
and return to eartha)
Earth to Mars (landing on Mars, 22.9 27
and return to earth a)
a Assumes air braking within atmospheres.
132 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
TABLE 4-5. Relative Payload-Mission Comparison Chart for High-Energy
Chemical Multistage Rocket Vehicles
Relative Payloada
Mission (%)
Earth satellite 100
Earth escape 35-45
Earth 24-hr orbit 10-25
Moon landing (hard) 35-45
Moon landing (soft) 10-20
Moon circumnavigation (single fly-by) 30-42
Moon satellite 20-30
Moon landing and return 1-4
Moon satellte and return 8-15
Mars flyby 20-30
Mars satellite 10-18
Mars landing 0.5-3
a300 nautical miles (555.6 km) earth orbit is 100% reference.
trajectory~time relation, and other factors that are beyond the scope of this
short treatment. Further information on space flight can be found in Refs. 4--2
to 4--4 and 4--11 to 4--13.
For example, for a co-planar earth~moon and return journey it is necessary
to undertake the following steps in sequence and provide an appropriate velo
city increment for each. This is similar in concept to the diagram for inter
planetary flight of Fig. 4--10. For the ascent from the earth and the entry into
an earth satellite orbit, the vehicle has to be accelerated ideally to approxi
mately 7300 m/sec; to change to the transfer orbit requires roughly another
2900 m/sec; to slow down and put the spacecraft into an approach to the moon
(retro-action) and enter into an orbit about the moon is about 1000 m/sec; and
to land on the moon is about another 1600 m/sec. The ascent from the moon
and the entry into an earth return orbit is about 2400 m/sec. Aerodynamic drag
is used to slow down the earth reentry vehicle and this maneuver does not
require the ex pen di ture of propellant. Adding these together and allowing 300
m/sec for various orbit adjustments comes to a total of about 14,500 m/sec,
which is the approximate cumulative total velocity needed for the mission.
Tables 4--3 and 4--4 compare very rough values of mission velocities and pay
loads for several space missions.
4.6. FLIGHT MANEUVERS
In this section we describe different flight maneuvers and relate them to specific
propulsion system types. The three categories of maneuvers are:
4.6. FLIGHT MANEUVERS 133
I. In translation maneuvers the rocket propulsion thrust vector goes through
the center of gravity of the vehicle. The vehicle momentum is changed in
the direction of the flight velocity. An example of several powered (trans
lational maneuvers) and unpowered (coasting) segments of a complex
space flight trajectory is shown in schematic, simplified form in Fig.
4-10. To date, most maneuvers have used chemical propulsion systems.
2. In truly rotational maneuvers there is no net thrust acting on the vehicle.
These are true couples that apply only torque. It requires four thrusters
to be able to rotate the vehicle in either direction about any one axis (two
thrusters apart, firing simultaneously, but in opposite directions). These
types of maneuver are usually provided by reaction control systems.
Most have used multiple liquid propellant thrusters, but in recent years
many space missions have used electrical propulsion.
3. A combination of categories I and 2, such as a large misaligned thrust
vector that does not go exactly through the center of gravity of the
vehicle. The misalignment can be corrected by changing the vector direc
tion of the main propulsion system (thrust vector control) during pow
ered flight or by applying a simultaneous compensating torque from a
separate reaction control system.
The following types of space flight maneuvers and vehicle accelerations use
rocket propulsion. All propulsion operations are controlled (started, moni
tored, and stopped) by the vehicle's guidance and control system.
a. First stage and its upper stage propulsion systems add momentum during
launch and ascent. They require rocket propulsion of high or medium
thrusts and limited durations (typically 0.7 to 8 minutes). To date all have
used chemical propulsion systems. They constitute the major mass of the
space vehicle and are discussed further in the next section.
b. Orbit injection or transferring from one orbit to another requires accu
rately predetermined total impulses. It can be performed by the main
propulsion system of the top stage of the launch vehicle. More often
it is done by a separate propulsion system at lower thrust levels than
the upper stages in item (a) above. Orbit injection can be a single
thrust operation after ascent from an earth launch station. If the
flight path is a Hohmann transfer ellipse (minimum energy) or a
faster transfer orbit, then two thrust application periods are neces
sary, one at the beginning and one at the end of the transfer path.
For injection into earth orbit, the thrust levels are typically between
200 and 45,000 N or 50 and 11,000 !bf, depending on the payload
size transfer time, and the specific orbit. If the new orbit is higher,
then the thrusts are applied in the flight direction. If the new orbit is
at a lower altitude, then the thrusts must be applied in a direction
opposite to the flight velocity vector. The transfer orbits can also be
134 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
achieved with a very low thrust level (0.001 to I N) using an electric
propulsion system, but the flight paths will be very different (multi
loop spiral) and the transfer duration will be much longer. This is
explained in Chapter 19. Similar maneuvers are also performed with
lunar or interplanetary flight missions, as the planetary landing mis
sion shown schematically in Fig. 4--10.
c. Velocity vector adjustment and minor in-flight correction maneuvers are
usually performed with low thrust, short duration and intermittent (pul
sing) operations, using a reaction control system with multiple small
liquid propellant thrusters, both for translation and rotation. The vernier
rockets on a ballistic missile are used to accurately calibrate the terminal
velocity vector for improved target accuracy. The reaction control rocket
systems in a space launch vehicle will allow accurate orbit injection
adjustment maneuvers after it is placed into orbit by another, less accu
rate propulsion system. Mid-course guidance-directed correction maneu
vers for the trajectories of deep space vehicles fall also into this category.
Propulsion systems for orbit maintenance maneuvers, also called station
keeping maneuvers (to overcome perturbing forces), keeping a spacecraft
in its intended orbit and orbital position and are also considered to be
part of this category.
d. Reentry and landing maneuvers can take several forms. If the landing
occurs on a planet that has an atmosphere, then the drag of the atmo
sphere will slow down the reentering vehicle. For an elliptical orbit the
drag will progressively reduce the perigee altitude and the perigee velocity
on every orbit. Landing at a precise, preplanned location requires a
particular velocity vector at a predetermined altitude and distance
from the landing site. The vehicle has to be rotated into the right position
and orientation, so as to use its heat shield correctly. The precise velocity
magnitude and direction prior to entering the denser atmosphere are
critical for minimizing the heat transfer (usually to the vehicle's heat
shield) and to achieve touchdown at the intended landing site or, in
the case of ballistic missiles, the intended target. This usually requires a
relatively minor maneuver (low total impulse). If there is very little or no
atmosphere (for instance, landing on the moon or Mercury), then a
reverse thrust has to be applied during descent and touchdown. The
rocket propulsion system usually has variable thrust to assure a soft
landing and to compensate for the decrease in vehicle mass as propellant
is consumed during descent. The lunar landing rocket engine, for exam
ple, had a 10 to 1 thrust variation.
e. Rendezvous and docking involve both rotational and translational man
euvers of small reaction control thrusters. Rendezvous and its time win
dows were discussed on page 123. Docking (sometimes called lock-on) is
the linking up of two spacecraft and requires a gradual gentle approach
(low thrust, pulsing node thrusters) so as not to damage the spacecraft.
4.6. FLIGHT MANEUVERS 135
f. A change of plane of the flight trajectory requires the application of a
thrust force (through the vehicle center of gravity) in a direction normal
to the original plane of the flight path. This is usually performed by a
propulsion system that has been rotated (by the reaction control system)
into the proper orientation. This maneuver is done to change the plane of
a satellite orbit or when going to a planet, such as Mars, whose orbit is
inclined to the plane of the earth's orbit.
g. Simple rotational maneuvers rotate the vehicle on command into a specific
angular position so as to orient or point a telescope, instrument, solar
panel, or antenna for purposes of observation, navigation, communica
tion, or solar power reception. Such a maneuver is also used to keep the
orientation of a satellite in a specific direction; for example, if an antenna
needs to be continuously pointed at the center of the earth, then the
satellite needs to be rotated around its own axis once every satellite
revolution. Rotation is also used to point a nozzle of the primary propul
sion system into its intended direction just prior to its start. It can also
provide for achieving flight stability, or for correcting angular oscilla
tions, that would otherwise increase drag or cause tumbling of the vehi
cle. Spinning or rolling a vehicle will improve flight stability, but will also
average out the misalignment in a thrust vector. If the rotation needs to
be performed quickly, then a chemical multi-thruster reaction control
system is used. If the rotational changes can be done over a long period
of time, then an electrical propulsion system with multiple thrusters is
often preferred.
h. De-orbiting and disposal of used or spent spacecraft is required today to
remove space debris. The spent spacecraft should not become a hazard to
other spacecraft. A relatively small thrust will cause the vehicle to go to a
low enough elliptical orbit so that atmospheric drag will cause further
slowing. In the dense regions of the atmosphere the reentering, expended
vehicle will typically break up or overheat (burn up).
i. Emergency or alternative mission. If there is a malfunction in a spacecraft
and it is decided to abort the mission, such as a premature quick return to
the earth without pursuing the originally intended mission, then some of
the rocket engines can be used for an alternate mission. For example, the
main rocket engine in the Apollo lunar mission service module is nor
mally used for retroaction to attain a lunar orbit and for return from
lunar orbit to the earth; it can be used for emergency separation of the
payload from the launch vehicle and for unusual midcourse corrections
during translunar coast, enabling an emergency earth return.
Table 4--6 lists the maneuvers that have just been described, together with
some others, and shows the various types of rocket propulsion system (as
mentioned in Chapter 1) that have been used for each of these maneuvers.
The table omits several propulsion systems, such as solar thermal or nuclear
136 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
TABLE 4-6. Types of Rocket Propulsion System Commonly Used for Different
Flight Maneuvers
Propulsion
System
Flight
Maneuvers and
Applications ,I,
Launch vehicle booster xx xx
Strap-on motor/engine xx xx
Upper stages of
launch vehicle xx xx X xx
Satellite orbit injection
and transfer orbits xx XX X
Flight velocity adjustments,
Flight path corrections,
Orbit raising X xx X X
Orbit/position maintenance,
rotation of spacecraft xx xx X X
Docking of two spacecraft xx
Reentry and landing,
Emergency maneuvers
X X
Deorbit X X X X
Deep space, Sun escape X X X
Tactical missiles xx
Strategic missiles X X X xx
Missile defense X xx xx
Legend: x = in use: x x = preferred for use.
rocket propulsion, because these have not yet flown in a real space m1ss1on.
The electrical propulsion systems have very high specific impulse (see Table
2-1), which makes them very attractive for deep space missions, but they can
be applied only to missions with sufficiently long thrust action time for reach
ing the desired vehicle velocity with very small acceleration. The items with a
double mark "xx" have been the preferred methods in recent years.
Reaction Control System
The functions of a reaction control system have been described in the previous
section on flight maneuvers. They are used for the maneuvers identified by
4.6. FLIGHT MANEUVERS 137
paragraphs c, e, and g. In some vehcle designs they are also used for tasks
described in b, part of d, and f, if the thrust levels are low.
A reaction control system (RCS), often called an auxiliary rocket propulsion
system, is needed to provide for trajectory corrections (small /::;.u additions), as
well as correcting the rotational or attitude position of almost all spacecraft
and all major launch vehicles. If only rotational maneuvers are made, it has
been called an attitude control system. The nomenclature has not been consis
tent throughout the industry or the literature.
An RCS can be incorporated into the payload stage and each of the stages
of a multiple stage vehicle. In some missions and designs the RCS is built into
only the uppermost stage; it operates throughout the flight and provides the
control torques and forces for all the stages. Liquid propellant rocket engines
with multiple thrusters have been used for almost all launch vehicles and the
majority of all spacecraft. Cold gas systems were used with early spacecraft
design. In the last decade an increasing number of electrical propulsion systems
have been used, primarily on spacecraft, as described in Chapter 19. The life of
an RCS may be short (when used on an individual vehicle stage), or it may see
use throughout the mission duration (perhaps 10 years) when part of an orbit
ing spacecraft.
The vehicle attitude has to be controlled about three mutually perpendicular
axes, each with two degrees of freedom (clockwise and counterclockwise rota
tion), giving a total of six degrees of rotational freedom. Pitch control raises or
lowers the nose of the vehicle, yaw torques induce a motion to the right or the
left side, and roll torques will rotate the vehicle about its axis, either clockwise
or counterclockwise. In order to apply a true torque it is necessary to use two
thrust chambers of exactly equal thrust and equal start and stop times, placed
an equal distance from the center of mass. Figure 4--13 shows a simple sphe
rical spacecraft attitude control system; thrusters x - x or x' - x' apply torques
that rotate about the X-axis. There is a minimum of 12 thrusters in this system,
but some spacecraft with geometrical or other limitations on the placement of
these nozzles or with provisions for redundancy may actually have more than
12. The same system can, by operating a different set of nozzles, also provide
translation forces; for example, if one each of the thrust units x and x' were
operated simultaneously, the resulting forces would propel the vehicle in the
direction of the Y-axis. With clever design it is possible to use fewer thrusters.
An RCS usually contains the following major subsystems: (I) sensing
devices for determining the attitude, velocity, and position of the vehicle
with respect to a reference direction at any one time, such as provided by
gyroscopes, star-trackers, or radio beacons; (2) a control-command system
that compares the actual space and rotary position with the desired or pro
grammed position and issues command signals to change the vehicle position
within a desired time period; and (3) devices for changing the angular position,
such as a set of high-speed gyroscopic wheels and a set of attitude control
thrust-providing devices. See Refs. 4--12 and 4--14.
138 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
z
.,,,.,,,----
/
I
z
y
FIGURE 4-13. Simplified attitude control system diagram for spacecraft. It requires 12
thrusters (identified as x, y, z) to allow the application of pure torques about three
perpendicular axes. The four unlabeled thrusters are needed for translation maneuvers
along the z axis. They are shown here in four clusters.
A precise attitude angular correction can also be achieved by the use of an
inertial or high-speed rotating reaction wheel, which applies torque when its
rotational speed is increased or decreased. While these wheels are quite simple
and effective, the total angular momentum change they can supply is generally
small. By using a pair of supplementary attitude control thrust rocket units it is
possible to unload or respin each wheel so it can continue to supply small
angular position corrections as needed.
The torque T of a pair of thrust chambers of thrust F and a separation
distance l is applied to give the vehicle with an angular or rotational moment of
inertia Ma an angular acceleration of magnitude a:
(4-33)
For a cylinder of equally distributed mass Ma= !mr2 and for a homogeneous
sphere it is Ma= ~mr2 • The largest possible practical value of moment arm l
will minimize the thrust and propellant requirements. If the angular accelera
tion is constant over a time period t, the vehicle will move at an angular speed
e,
wand through a displacement angle namely
w=at and (4-34)
4.7. FLIGHT VEHICLES 139
Commonly a control system senses a small angular disturbance and then com
mands an appropriate correction. For this detection of an angular position
change by an accurate sensor it is actually necessary for the vehicle to undergo
a slight angular displacement. Care must be taken to avoid overcorrection and
hunting of the vehicle position or the control system. For this reason many
spacecraft require extremely short multiple pulses (0.010 to 0.030 sec) and low
thrust (0.01 to 100 N) (see Refs. 4-13 and 4-14).
Reaction control systems can be characterized by the magnitude of the total
impulse, the number, thrust level, and direction of the thrusters, and by their
duty cycles. The duty cycle refers to the number of thrust pulses, their operating
times, the times between thrust applications, and the timing of these short
operations during the mission operating period. For a particular thruster, a
30% duty cycle means an average active cumulative thrust period of 30%
during the propulsion system's flight duration. These propulsion parameters
can be determined from the mission, the guidance and control approach, the
desired accuracy, flight stability, the likely thrust misalignments of the main
propulsion systems, the three-dimensional flight path variations, the perturba
tions to the trajectory, and several other factors. Some of these parameters are
often difficult to determine.
4.7. FLIGHT VEHICLES
As mentioned, the vast majority of rocket propelled vehicles are simple, single
stage, and use solid propellant rocket motors. Most are used in military appli
cations, as described in the next section. This section discusses more sophisti
cated multistage space launch vehicles and mentions others, such as large
ballistic missiles (often called strategic missiles) and some sounding rockets.
All have some intelligence in their guidance and navigation system. The total
number of multistage rocket vehicles produced world wide in the last few years
has been between 140 and 220 per year.
A single stage to orbit (LEO) is limited in the payload it can carry. Figure
4-2 shows that a high-performance single-stage vehicle with a propellant frac
tion of 0.95 and an average Is of 400 sec can achieve an ideal terminal velocity
of about 12,000 m/sec without payload. If the analysis includes drag and
gravity forces, a somewhat higher value of Is, maneuvers in the trajectory,
and an attitude control system, it is likely that the payload would be between
0.2 and 1.4 percent of the gross take-off mass, depending on the design. For a
larger percentage of payload, and for ambitious missions, we use vehicles with
two or more stages as described here.
Multistage Vehicles
Multistep or multistage rocket vehicles permit higher vehicle velocities, more
payload for space vehicles, and improved performance for long-range ballistic
140 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
missiles. After the useful propellant is fully consumed in a particular stage, the
remaining empty mass of that expended stage is dropped from the vehicle and
the operation of the propulsion system of the next step or stage is started. The
last or top stage, which is usually the smallest, carries the payload. The empty
mass of the expended stage or step is separated from the remainder of the
vehicle, because it avoids the expenditure of additional energy for further
accelerating a useless mass. As the number of steps is increased, the initial
takeoff mass can be decreased; but the gain in a smaller initial mass becomes
less apparent when the total number of steps is large. Actually, the number of
steps chosen should not be too large, because the physical mechanisms become
more numerous, complex, and heavy. The most economical number of steps is
usually between two and six, depending on the mission. Several different multi
stage launch vehicle configurations have been used successfully and four are
shown in Fig. 4--14. Most are launched vertically, but a few have been launched
from an airplane, such as the three-stage Pegasus space vehicle.
The payload of a multistage rocket is essentially proportional to the takeoff
mass, even though the payload is only a very small portion of the initial mass.
If a payload of 50 kg requires a 6000-kg multistage rocket, a 500-kg payload
would require a 60,000-kg rocket unit with an identical number of stages, and a
similar configuration with the same payload fraction. When the operation of
the upper stage is started, immediately after thrust termination of the lower
stage, then the total ideal velocity of a multistage vehicle of tandem or series
stage arrangement is simply the sum of the individual stage velocity increments.
For n stages, the final velocity increment !1uf is
Ln
!1uf = !1u = !1u1 + !1u2 + !1u3 + ... (4-35)
1
The individual velocity increments are given by Eq. 4--6. For the simplified case
of a vacuum flight in a gravity-free field this can be expressed as
(4-36)
This equation defines the maximum velocity an ideal multistage vehicle can
attain in a gravity-free vacuum environment. For more accurate actual trajec
tories the individual velocity increments can be determined by integrating Eqs.
4--15 and 4--16, which consider drag and gravity losses. Other losses or trajec
tory perturbations can also be included, as mentioned earlier in this chapter.
Such an approach requires numerical solutions.
For two- or three-stage vehicles the overall vehicle mass ratio (initial mass at
takeoff to final mass of last stage) can reach values of over 100 (corresponding
to an equivalent single-stage propellant mass fraction I; of0.99). Figure 4--2 can
be thus divided into regions for single- and multistage vehicles.
4.7. FLIGHT VEHICLES 141
Sustainer
Sustainer stage Winged
(contains propellant sustainer
for booster thrust) stage
Third
First
stage
stage
Second
stage
First stage
or booster Booster
Dropable booster
engine ring package
(without propellant)
Staging Partial staging Parallel staging Piggy-back
in series staging
or tandem
FIGURE 4-14. Simplified schematic sketches of four geometric configurations for
assembling individual stages into a launch vehicle. The first is very common and the
stages are stacked vertically on top of each other, as in the Minuteman long-range
missile or the Delta launch vehicle. Partial staging was used on early versions of the
Atlas; it allows all engines to be started at launching, thus avoiding a start during flight,
and it permits the shut-off of engines on the launch stand if a failure is sensed prior to
lift-off. The two booster engines, arranged in a doughnut-shaped assembly, are dropped
off in flight. In the third sketch there are two or more separate "strap-on" booster stages
attached to the bottom stage of a vertical configuration and this allows an increase in
vehicle performance. The piggy-back configuration concept on the right is used in the
Space Shuttle.
142 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
For multistage vehicles the stage mass ratios, thrust levels, propulsion
durations, and the location or travel of the center of gravity of the stages are
usually optimized, often using a complex trajectory computer program. The
high specific impulse rocket engine (e.g., using hydrogen-oxygen propellants) is
normally employed in upper stages of space launch vehicles, because a small
increase in specific impulse is more effective there than in lower stages.
Example 4-3. A two-stage planetary exploration vehicle is launched from a high-orbit
satellite into a gravity-free vacuum trajectory. The following notations are used and
explained in the diagram.
m0 initial mass of vehicle (or stage) at launch
mp useful propellant mass of stage
m; initial mass of stage(s)
m1 final mass of stage (after rocket operation); it includes the empty propulsion
system with its residual propellant, the structures of the vehicle and the pro
pulsion system, the control, guidance, and payload masses.
mP1 payload mass; it includes the guidance, control and communications equip
ment, antennas, scientific instruments, research apparatus, power supply, solar
panels, sensors, etc.
Payload
First stage (mi)J (mp)J
or booster
4.7. FLIGHT VEHICLES 143
Subscripts 1 and 2 refer to first and second stages. The following are given:
Flight and velocity increment in gravity-free vacuum 6200 m/sec
Specific impulse, / 310 sec
5
Effective exhaust velocity, c (all stages) 3038 m/sec
Initial launch vehicle mass 4500 kg
Propellant mass fraction, I; (each stage) 0.88
Structural mass fraction, (1 - I;) (each stage) 0.12
Determine the payload for two cases: (1) when the two stage masses are equal, and (2)
when the mass ratios of the two stages are equal.
SOLUTION. For launch the takeoff mass (m 0) equals the loaded first-stage mass (m;) 1
plus the loaded second-stage mass (m;h plus the payload (mp 1). The propellant mass
fraction I; is 0.88. For case (1) the first and second stages are identical. Thus
=
m; = (m;) 1 (m;) 2
mp = (mp)1 = (mph = 0.88m;
(mp) = 0.88(m;)
1 1
(m0)1 = 4500 kg = 2m; + mp!
et,u/c = e6200/3038 = 7_ 6968 = (mo), . (moh
(mo), - (mp) (moh - (mph
1
From these relationships it is possible to solve for the payload mass mpt, which is 275 kg.
= =
m; (4500 - 275)/2 2113 kg each stage
mp= 0.88m; = 1855 kg each stage
For case (2) the mass ratios of the two stages are the same. The mass ratio (1 /1\,R) was
defined by
= =
m0/mJ (mo)i/[(mo) 1 - [(mp)i] (moh/[(moh - (mph]
(m 0)1 = 4500 = (m;) 1 + (m;) 2 + mp!
et,u/c = 7.6968 = {4500/[4500 - (mp)i])2
Solving for the first-stage propellant mass gives (mp), = 2878 kg.
(m;) = (mp)i/0.88 = 3270 kg
1
(moh = (m;) 2 +mp!= 4500 - 3270 = 1230 kg
et,u/c = 7.6968 = {1230/[1230 - (mph])2 ; (mph = 786.6 kg
(m;h = (mph/0.88 = 894 kg
The payload mpt is 1230 - 894 = 336 kg. This is about 22% larger than the payload of
275 kg in the first case. When the mass ratios of the stages are equal, the payload is a
maximum for gravity-free vacuum flight and the distribution of the masses between the
144 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
stages is optimum. For a single-stage vehicle with the same take-off mass and same
propellant fraction, the payload is substantially less. See Problem 4-13.
If a three-stage vehicle had been used in Example 4--3 instead of a two-stage
version, the payload would have been even larger. However, the theoretical
payload increase will only be about 8 or 10%. A fourth stage gives an even
smaller theoretical improvement; it would add only 3 to 5% to the payload.
The amount of potential performance improvement diminishes with each
added stage. Each additional stage means extra complications in an actual
vehicle (such as a reliable separation mechanism, an interstage structure, joints
or couplings in a connecting pipes and cables, etc.), requires additional inert
mass (increasing the mass ratio J\,R), and compromises the overall reliability.
Therefore, the minimum number of stages that will meet the payload and the
!',,.u requirements is usually selected.
The flight paths taken by the vehicles in the two simplified cases of Example
4--3 are different, since the time of flight and the acceleration histories are
different. One conclusion from this example applies to all multistage rocket
propelled vehicles; for each mission there is an optimum number of stages, an
optimum distribution of the mass between the stages, and there is usually also
an optimum flight path for each design, where a key vehicle parameter such as
payload, velocity increment, or range is a maximum.
Launch Vehicles
Usually the first or lowest stage, often called a booster stage, is the largest and it
requires the largest thrust and largest total impulse. All stages need chemical
propulsion to achieve the desired thrust-to-weight ratio. These thrusts usually
become smaller with each subsequent stage, also known as upper stage or
sustainer stage. The thrust magnitudes depend on the mass of the vehicle,
which in turn depends on the mass of the payload and the mission. Typical
actual configurations are shown by simple sketches in Fig. 4--14. There is an
optimum size and thrust value for each stage in a multistage vehicle and the
analysis to determine these optima can be quite complex.
Many heavy launch vehicles have two to six strap-on solid propellant motor
boosters, which together form a supplementary first stage strapped on or
mounted to the first stage of the launch vehicle (Space Shuttle, Titan, Delta,
Atlas, Ariane). This is shown in the third sketch of Fig. 4--14. The Russians
have used liquid propellant strap-on boosters on several vehicles, because they
give better performance. Boosters operate simultaneously with the first stage
and, after they burn out, they are usually separated and dropped off before
completion of the first stage's propulsive operation. This has also been called a
half stage or zero stage, as in Table 1-3.
There is a variety of existing launch vehicles. The smaller ones are for low
payloads and low orbits; the larger ones usually have more stages, are heavier,
more expensive, have larger payloads, or higher mission velocities. The vehicle
4.7. FLIGHT VEHICLES 145
cost increases with the number of stages and the initial vehicle launch mass.
Once a particular launch vehicle has been proven to be reliable, it is usually
modified and uprated to allow improvements in its capability or mission flex
ibility. Each of the stages of a space launch vehicle can have several rocket
engines, each with specific missions or maneuvers. The Space Shuttle system
has 67 different rockets which are shown schematically in Fig. 1-13. In most
cases each rocket engine is used for a specific maneuver, but in many cases the
same engine is used for more than one specific purpose; the small reaction
control thrusters in the Shuttle serve, for example, to give attitude control
(pitch, yaw, and roll) during orbit insertion and reentry, for counteracting
internal shifting of masses (astronaut movement, extendible arm), small trajec
tory corrections, minor flight path adjustments, docking, and precise pointing
of scientific instruments.
The spacecraft is that part of a launch vehicle that carries the payload. It is
the only part of the vehicle that goes into orbit or deep space and some are
designed to return to earth. The final major space maneuver, such as orbit
injection or planetary landing, often requires a substantial velocity increment;
the propulsion system, which provides the force for this maneuver, may be
integrated with the spacecraft, or it may be part of a discardable stage, just
below the spacecraft. Several of the maneuvers described in Section 4-6 can
often be accomplished by propulsion systems located in two different stages of
a multistage vehicle. The selection of the most desirable propulsion systems,
and the decision on which of the several propulsion systems will perform
specific maneuvers, will depend on optimizing performance, cost, reliability,
schedule, and mission flexibility as described in Chapter 17.
When a space vehicle is launched from the earth's surface into an orbit, it
flies through three distinct trajectory phases. (I) Most are usually launched
vertically and then undergo a turning maneuver while under rocket power to
point the flight velocity vector into the desired direction. (2) The vehicle then
follows a free-flight (unpowered) ballistic trajectory (usually elliptical), up to its
apex. Finally (3) a satellite needs an extra push from a chemical rocket system
up to add enough total impulse or energy to accelerate it to orbital velocity.
This last maneuver is also known as orbit insertion. During the initial powered
flight the trajectory angle and the thrust cut-off velocity of the last stage are
adjusted by the guidance system to a velocity vector in space that will allow the
vehicle to reach the apogee of its elliptic path exactly at the desired orbit
altitude. As shown in Fig. 4-9, a multistage ballistic missile follows the same
two ascent flight phases mentioned above, but it then continues its elliptical
ballistic trajectory all the way down to the target.
Historically successful launch vehicles have been modified, enlarged, and
improved in performance. The newer versions retain most of the old, proven,
reliable components, materials, and subsystems. This reduces development
effort and cost. Upgrading a vehicle allows an increase in mission energy
(more ambitious mission) or payload. Typically, it is done by one or more of
these types of improvement: increasing the mass of propellant without an
146 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
undue increase in tank or case mass; uprating the thrust and strengthening the
engine; more specific impulse; or adding successively more or bigger strap-on
boosters. It also usually includes a strengthening of the structure to accept
higher loads.
Figure 4-15 and Table 4-7 illustrate the growth of payload and mission
capability for the early Titan family of space launch vehicles and the effect of
the orbit on the payload. The figure shows the evolution of four different
multistage configurations of the launch vehicle and their principal propulsion
systems; the table defines the increase in payload for the four vehicle config
urations and also how the payload is reduced as more ambitious orbits are
flown. When each of these vehicles is equipped with an additional third stage, it
is able to launch substantial payloads into earth escape or synchronous orbit.
The table describes the propulsion for each of the several stages used on those
vehicles and the payload for several arbitrarily selected orbits.
Table 4-7 shows the effects of orbit inclination and altitude on the payload.
The inclination is the angle between the equatorial plane of the earth and the
trajectory. An equatorial orbit has zero inclination and a polar orbit has 90°
inclination. Since the earth's rotation gives the vehicle an initial velocity, a
Launch vehicle Titan II Titan Ill Titan IV Titan IVB
SLV
Configuration
Major Modified Added twos! Larger solid New, 12% larger,
configuration Titan II segment rocket 7 segment 3 segment
modifications (ICBM) boosters; more rocket boosters, solid boosters
liquid propellant higher liquid with reinforced
rocket engine plastic cases
thrust, longer
duration
First flight 1988 1989 1990 1997
FIGURE 4-15. Upgrading methods are illustrated by these four related configurations
in the evolution of the Titan Space Launch Vehicle family. Source: Lockheed-Martin
Corp.
TABLE 4-7. Payload Capabilities and Rocket Propulsion Systems of Four Titan Space Launch Vehicle Configurations
Space Launch Vehicle Titan II SLY Titan III Titan IV Titan IV B
Payloads ( lbm) in Low Earth Orbits for 2-Stage Configurations
100 mi circular orbit, 28.6° 5000 31,000 39,000 47,800
inclination from Cape Canaveral
Same, but 99° launch from 4200 26,800 32,000 38,800
Vandenberg AFB
Elliptic orbit, !00 mi -+ 1000 mi, 3000 25,000 - 30,000 - 34,000
28.6° inclination
Payloads (lbm) in Synchronous Earth Orbit, 3-Stage Configurations
Payload for third-stage propulsion 2200 4000 I0,000 12,700
system, optional (see below)
Rocket Propulsion Systems in Titan Launch Vehicles
Solid rocket boosters None 2 units, each metal case Same, but 7 segments 12% more propellant,
(United Technologies/CSD) 5! segments I,= 159.7 x 106 !bf-sec 3 segments
I, = 123 x 106 Ib f-sec I, = I 79 x !06 Ib f-sec
Stage I, Aerojet LR 87-AJ-l l 2 thrust chambers 430,000 !bf Same, 529,000 !bf thrust Same, but uprated to Same
engine, N20 4 with 50% thrust at SL (vacuum) 550,000 !bf thrust in a vacuum
N 2H4/50% UDMH
Stage II, Aerojet LR 91-AJ-l 1 101,000 !bf thrust in vacuum Same Uprated to I 06,000 Ib f Same
engine N20 4 with 50% N2H4 thrust in vacuum
50% UDMH
Stage III has several SSPS with Aerojet liquid United Technologies/ Centaur; Same
alternative systems for each storable propellant CSD, Interim Upper 2 Pratt & Whitney
vehicle; only one is engine Al 10-118 K Stage (!US) solid RL IOA-3-3A rocket
listed here (9800 !bf thrust) propellant rocket engines, 33,000 !bf
.... motor (see Table 11-3) thrust, H 2/0 2
:!:j Source: Lockheed-Martin Astronautics, Aerojet Propulsion Company, and Pratt & Whitney Division of United Technologies Corp.
148 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
launch from the equator in a eastward direction will give the highest payload.
For the same orbit altitude other trajectory inclinations have a lower payload.
For the same inclination the payload decreases with orbit altitude, since more
energy has to be expended to overcome gravitational attraction.
The Space Shuttle has its maximum payload when launched due east into an
orbit with 28.5° inclination from Kennedy Space Flight Center in Florida,
namely about 56,000 lb ( or 25,455 kg) at a I 00 nautical mile (185 km) orbit
altitude. The payload decreases by about 100 lb (45.4 kg) for every nautical
mile increase in altitude. If the inclination is 57°, the payload diminishes to
about 42,000 lb (or 19,090 kg). If launched in a southerly direction from
Vandenberg Air Force Base on the west coast in a 98° inclination into a
circular, nearly polar orbit, the payload will be only about 30,600 lb or
13,909 kg.
The dramatic decrease of payload with circular orbits of increasing altitude
and with different inclination is shown for the Pegasus, a relatively small, air
launched, space launch vehicle, in Fig. 4-16. The payload is a maximum when
launching from the earth equator in the east direction, that is at 0° inclination.
Assumes:
- 220 ft/sec Velocity Reserve
200 - Entire Weight of 38 Inch Separation .,,,.,_~~-~.-+----'""..?....__~c--------------1
System Kept on Launch Vehicle Side
- Direct Injection (No Dog-Legs)
150 - ER= Eastern Range ---+-----"""-d-....:::,,,,.~-------'~-+--'"""-'~~
- WFF= Wallops Flight Facility
- WR = western Range (Vandenberg Air Force Base)
100'-----_L__ ___
_L__ __- -1._ ___- -'-----'-------'
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Circular orbit altitude (km)
FIGURE 4-16. Decrease of payload with circular orbit altitude and orbit inclination
for the Pegasus launch vehicle. This is an air-launched, relatively simple, three-stage
launch vehicle of 50 in. diameter driven by a solid propellant rocket motor in each stage.
(Courtesy Orbital Sciences Corporation)
4.8. MILITARY MISSILES 149
The figure shows that a practical payload becomes too small for orbits higher
than about 1200 km. To lift heavier payloads and to go to higher orbits
requires a larger launch vehicle than the Pegasus. Figure 4-16 is based on
the assumption of a particular payload separation mechanism (38 in.) and a
specific !':,.u vehicle velocity reserve (220 ft/sec), for items such as the normal
changes in atmospheric density (which can double the drag) or mass tolerances
of the propulsion systems. Similar curves can be provided by the makers of all
launch vehicles.
4.8. MILITARY MISSILES
The majority of all rocket propulsion systems built today are for military
purposes. There is a large variety of missiles and military missions and there
fore many different propulsion systems. All are chemical propulsion systems.
They range from simple, small, unguided, fin-stabilized single-stage rocket
projectiles (used in air-to-surface missions and surface-to-surface bombard
ment) up to complex, sophisticated, expensive, long-range, multistage ballistic
missiles, which are intended for faraway military or strategic targets. The term
"surface" means either land surface (ground launch or ground target), ocean
surface (ship launched), or below the ocean surface (submarine launched). A
tactical missile is used for attacking or defending ground troops, nearby mili
tary or strategic installations, military aircraft, or war missiles. The armed
forces also use military satellites for missions such as reconnaissance, early
warning of impending attack, secure communication, or navigation.
Strategic missiles with a range of 3000 km or more have been two- or three
stage surface-to-surface rocket-propelled missiles. Early designs used liquid
propellant rocket engines and some are still in service. Beginning about 30
years ago, newer strategic missiles have used solid propellant rocket motors.
Both types usually also have a liquid propellant reaction control system (RCS)
for accurately adjusting the final payload flight velocity (in magnitude, direc
tion, and position in space) at the cut-off of the propulsion system of the last
stage. A solid propellant RCS version also exists. The flight analysis and bal
listic trajectories of the long-range missiles are similar in many ways to those
described for launch vehicles in this chapter. See Fig. 4-9.
Solid propellant rocket motors are preferred for most tactical missile mis
sions, because they allow simple logistics and can be launched quickly (Ref.
4-15). If altitudes are low and flight durations are long, such as with a cruise
missile, an air-breathing jet engine and a winged vehicle, which provides lift,
will usually be more effective than a long-duration rocket. However, a large
solid propellant rocket motor is still needed as a booster to launch the cruise
missile and bring it up to speed. There are a variety of different tactical mis
sions, resulting in different sized vehicles with different propulsion needs, as
explained later in this section and in Ref. 4-15.
150 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
For each of the tactical missile applications, there is an optimum rocket
propulsion system and almost all of them use solid propellant rocket motors.
For each application there is an optimum total impulse, an optimum thrust
time profile, an optimum nozzle configuration (single or multiple nozzles, with
or without thrust vector control, optimum area ratio), optimum chamber pres
sure, and a favored solid propellant grain configuration. Low exhaust plume
gas radiation emissions in the visible, infrared or ultraviolet spectrum and
certain safety features (making the system insensitive to energy stimuli) can
be very important in some of the tactical missile applications; these are dis
cussed in Chapters 12 and 18.
Short-range, uncontrolled, unguided, single-stage rocket vehicles, such as
military rocket projectiles (ground and air launched) and rescue rockets, are
usually quite simple in design. Their general equations of motion are derived in
Section 4.3, and a detailed analysis is given in Ref. 4-1.
Unguided military rocket-propelled missiles are today produced in larger
numbers than any other category of rocket-propelled vehicles. The 2.75 in.
diameter, folding fin unguided solid propellant rocket missile has recently
been produced in the United States in quantities of almost 250,000 per year.
Guided missiles for anti-aircraft, anti-tank, or infantry support have been
produced in annual quantities of hundreds and sometimes over a thousand.
Table 1-6 lists several guided missiles.
Because these rocket projectiles are essentially unguided missiles, the accu
racy of hitting a target depends on the initial aiming and the dispersion induced
by uneven drag, wind forces, oscillations, and misalignment of nozzles, body,
and fins. Deviations from the intended trajectory are amplified if the projectile
is moving at a low initial velocity, because the aerodynamic stability of a
projectile with fins is small at low flight speeds. When projectiles are launched
from an aircraft at a relatively high initial velocity, or when projectiles are
given stability by spinning them on their axis, their accuracy of reaching a
target is increased two- to ten-fold, compared to a simple fin-stabilized rocket
launched from rest.
In guided air-to-air and surface-to-air rocket-propelled missiles the time of
flight to a given target, usually called the time to target t is an important flight
1,
performance parameter. With the aid of Fig. 4-17 it can be derived in a
simplified form by considering the distance traversed by the rocket (called
the range) to be the integrated area underneath the velocity-time curve. This
simplification assumes no drag, no gravity effect, nearly horizontal flight, a
relatively small distance traversed during powered flight compared to the total
range, and a linear increase in velocity during powered flight.
S+!uPtP
tr=---- (4-37)
Uo +up
4.8. MILITARY MISSILES 151
Powered
flight---------- Free flight
----.i Maximum velocity
r----------~-i.---at burnout of
propellant
Actual velocity is
~ Probable actual curve -s..---decreased by
-0( a)
;
a nl olo nw -li in ng
e
af ro r
c
hd ara ng
g
ea n ind drag
>
mass
Velocity of
r-----;----------~--;.--.------launching
aircraft
,____ __- +-Time to reach target -----.i
Time
FIGURE 4-17. Simplified trajectory for an unguided, non-maneuvering, air-launched
rocket projectile. Solid line shows flight velocity without drag or gravity and dashed
curve shows likely actual flight.
Here S is the free-flight (unpowered) range, up is the velocity increase of the
rocket during powered flight up to the time of burnout, tP is the time of rocket
burning, and u is the initial velocity of the launching aircraft. For more
0
accurate values, the velocity increase u is the initial velocity of the launching
0
aircraft. For more accurate values, the velocity increase up is given by Eq. 4-19.
More accurate values can only be obtained through a detailed step-to-step
trajectory analysis that considers the effects of drag and gravity.
In unguided air-launched air-to-air or air-to-surface projectiles the aiming is
done by orienting the launching aircraft. In guided missiles (air-to-air, air-to
ground, ground-to-air, or ground-to-incoming-missile) the rocket's thrust
direction, thrust magnitude, or thrust pulse timing can be commanded by an
intelligent guidance and control system to chase a maneuvering moving target.
The guidance system senses the flight path of the target, calculates a predicted
impact point, and then controls the flight path of the guided missile to achieve
an impact (or near-impact if a proximity fuse is used) with the target. It can
also apply to a ground-launched or a satellite-launched antiballistic missile. In
both the unguided projectile and the guided missile the hit probability increases
as the time to target t, is reduced. In one particular air-to-air combat situation,
the effectiveness of the rocket projectile varied approximately inversely as the
cube of the time to target. The best results (e.g., best hit probability) are usually
achieved when the time to target is as small as practically possible.
The analysis of the missile and propulsion configuration that gives the mini
mum time to target over all the likely flight scenarios can be complex. The
following rocket propulsion features and parameters will help to reduce the
time to target, but their effectiveness will depend on the specific mission, range,
guidance and control system, and the particular flight conditions.
152 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
1. High initial thrust or high initial acceleration for the missile to quickly
reach a high-initial-powered flight velocity.
2. Application of additional lower thrust to counteract drag and gravity
losses and thus maintain a high flight velocity. This can be a single rocket
propulsion system that has a short high initial thrust and a smaller (10 to
25%) sustaining thrust of lower duration. It can also be a system that
applies discrete pulses of thrust to increase vehicle velocity after drag
forces have caused it to diminish, thus maintaining a higher average flight
velocity.
3. For higher supersonic flight speeds, a two-stage missile can be more
effective. Here the first stage is dropped off after its propellant has
been consumed, thus reducing the inert mass of the next stage, and
improving its mass ratio and thus its flight velocity increase.
4. If the target is highly maneuverable and if the closing velocity between
missile and target is large, it may be necessary not only to provide an
axial thrust, but also to apply large side forces or side accelerations to a
tactical missile. This can be accomplished either by aerodynamic forces
(lifting surfaces or flying at an angle of attack) or by multiple nozzle
propulsion systems with variable or pulsing thrusts; the rocket engine
then has an axial thruster and several side thrusters. The thrusters have
to be so located that all the thrust forces are essentially directed through
the center of gravity of the vehicle. The thrusters that provide the side
accelerations have also been called divert thrusters, since they divert the
vehicle in a direction normal to the axis of flight direction.
5. Drag losses can be reduced if the missile has a large L/ D ratio ( or a small
cross-sectional area) and if the propellant density is high, allowing a
smaller missile volume. The drag forces can be high if the missile travels
at low altitude and high speed.
A unique military application is rocket assisted gun launched projectiles for
attaining longer artillery ranges. Their small rocket motors withstand very
high accelerations in the gun barrel (5000 to 10,000 g is typical). They are
0
in production.
4.9. AERODYNAMIC EFFECT OF EXHAUST PLUMES
The effect of rocket exhaust jets or plumes on the aerodynamic characteristics
of a missile is usually to decrease the vehicle drag at supersonic missile speeds
and to increase it at subsonic speeds. On subsonic vehicles, a supersonic rocket
plume acts very much like an ejector and sucks adjacent air into its path. This
affects vehicles where the rocket is located on a tapering aft end. The ejector
action of the flame accelerates the adjacent air, thereby increasing the skin
friction locally and usually reducing the pressure on the vehicle aft body or
base plate near the nozzle exit location.
4.10. FLIGHT STABILITY 153
At supersonic speeds there often is a turbulent wake area with a low local
pressure at the aft end of projectile. With the action of a rocket plume, the void
space is filled with rocket gases and the pressure on the aft portion of the body
is increased. This increases the pressure thrust and thus reduces the base drag.
Exhaust plume effects are discussed in Chapter 18. In fact, some artillery
munitions and short-range rockets can achieve increased range (by 10 to
50%) by adding a small rocket-type gas generator; its plume fills the void at
the base of the projectile with reaction gas at a finite pressure, thus increasing
the base pressure of the projectile and reducing the base drag.
4.10. FLIGHT ST ABILITY
Stability of a vehicle is achieved when the vehicle does not rotate or oscillate in
flight. Unstable flights are undesirable, because pitch or yaw oscillations
increase drag (flying at an angle of attack most of the time) and cause problems
with instruments and sensors (target seekers, horizon scanners, sun sensors, or
radar). Instability often leads to tumbling (uncontrolled turning) of vehicles,
which causes missing of orbit insertion, missing targets, or sloshing of liquid
propellant in tanks.
Stability can be built in by proper design so that the flying vehicle will be
inherently stable, or stability can be obtained by appropriate controls, such as
the aerodynamic control surfaces on an airplane, a reaction control system, or
hinged multiple rocket nozzles.
Flight stability exists when the overturning moments (e.g., those due to a
wind gust, thrust misalignment, or wing misalignment) are smaller than the
stabilizing moments induced by thrust vector controls or by aerodynamic con
trol surfaces. When the destabilizing moments exceed the stabilizing moments
about the center of gravity, the vehicle turns or tumbles. In unguided vehicles,
such as low-altitude rocket projectiles, stability of flight in a rectilinear motion is
achieved by giving a large stability margin to the vehicle by using tail fins and by
locating the center of gravity ahead of the center of aerodynamic pressure. In a
vehicle with an active stability control system, a nearly neutral inherent stability
is desired, so that the applied control forces are small, thus requiring small
control devices, small RCS thrusters, small actuating mechanisms, and struc
tural mass. Neutral stability is achieved by locating aerodynamic surfaces and
the mass distribution of the components within the vehicle in such a manner that
the center of gravity is only slightly above the center of aerodynamic pressure.
Because the aerodynamic moments change with Mach number, the center of
pressure does not stay fixed during accelerating flight but shifts, usually along
the vehicle axis. The center of gravity also changes its position as propellant is
consumed and the vehicle mass decreases. Thus it is usually very difficult to
achieve neutral missile stability at all altitudes, speeds, and flight conditions.
Stability considerations affect rocket propulsion system design in several
ways. By careful nozzle design it is possible to minimize thrust misalignment
154 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
and thus to minimize torques on the vehicle and the reaction control propellant
consumption. It is possible to exercise control over the travel of the center of
gravity by judicious design. In liquid propellant rockets, special design provi
sions, special tank shapes, and a careful selection of tank location in the vehicle
afford this possibility. The designer generally has less freedom in controlling
the travel of the center of gravity of solid propellant rockets. By using nozzles
at the end of a blast tube, as shown in Fig. 14--6, it is possible to place the solid
propellant mass close to the vehicle's center of gravity. Attitude control liquid
propellant engines with multiple thrusters have been used satisfactorily to
obtain control moments for turning vehicles in several ways, as described in
Section 4.6 and in Chapter 6.
Unguided rocket projectiles and missiles are often given a roll or rotation by
inclined aerodynamic fins or inclined multiple rocket exhaust gas nozzles to
improve flight stability and accuracy. This is similar to the rotation given to
bullets by spiral-grooved rifles. This spin stability is achieved by gyroscopic
effects, where an inclination of the spin axis is resisted by torques. The cen
trifugal effects cause problems in emptying liquid propellant tanks and extra
stresses on solid propellant grains. In some applications a low-speed roll is
applied not for spin stability but to assure that any effects of thrust vector
deviations or aerodynamic shape misalignments are minimized and canceled
out.
PROBLEMS
1. For a vehicle in gravitationless space, determine the mass ratio necessary to boost
the vehicle velocity by 1600 m/sec when the effective exhaust velocity is 2000 m/sec.
Answer: 0.449.
2. What is the mass ratio mp/mo for a vehicle that has one-fifth its original takeoff
mass at the time of the completion of rocket operation?
Answer: 0.80.
3. Determine the burnout velocity and burnout altitude for a dragless projectile with
the following parameters for a simplified vertical trajectory: c = 2209 m/sec;
mp/mo = 0.57; tP = 5.0 sec; and u 0 = h 0 = 0.
Answers: up = 1815 m/sec; hp = 3.89 x 103 m.
4. Assume that this projectile had a drag coefficient essentially similar to the 0° curve
in Fig. 4-3 and redetermine the answers of Problem 3 and the approximate percen
tage errors in up and hr Use a step-by-step method.
5. A research space vehicle in gravity-free and drag-free outer space launches a smaller
spacecraft into a meteor shower region. The 2 kg instrument package of this space
craft (25 kg total mass) limits the maximum acceleration to no more than 50 m/sec2 .
It is launched by a solid propellant rocket motor (/ = 260 sec and ( = 0.88).
5
Determine
(a) the maximum allowable burn time, assuming steady propellant mass flow;
(b) the maximum velocity relative to the launch vehicle.
PROBLEMS 155
(c) Solve for (a) and (b) if half of the total impulse is delivered at the previous
propellant mass flow rate, with the other half at 20% of this mass flow rate.
6. For a satellite cruising in a circular orbit at an altitude of 500 km, determine the
period of revolution, the flight speed, and the energy expended to bring a unit mass
into this orbit.
Answers: 1.58 hr, 7613 m/sec, 33.5 MJ/kg.
7. A large ballistic rocket vehicle has the following characteristics: propellant mass
flow rate: 12 slugs/sec (I slug= 32.2 lbm = 14.6 kg); nozzle exit velocity: 7100 ft/sec;
nozzle exit pressure: 5 psia (assume no separation); atmospheric pressure: 14.7 psia
(sea level); takeoff weight: 12.0 tons (1 ton= 2000 !bf); burning time: 50 sec; nozzle
exit area: 400 in.2 . Determine (a) the sea-level thrust; (b) the sea-level effective
exhaust velocity; (c) the initial thrust-to-weight ratio; (d) the initial acceleration;
(e) the mass inverse ratio m /m .
0 1
Answers: 81,320 !bf; 6775 ft/sec; 3.38; 2.38g 0.
8. In Problem 7 compute the altitude and missile velocity at the time of power plant
cutoff, neglecting the drag of the atmosphere and assuming a simple vertical tra
jectory.
9. A spherical satellite has 12 identical monopropellant thrust chambers for attitude
control with the following performance characteristics: thrust (each unit): 5 !bf; ls
(steady state or more than 2 sec); 240 sec; ls (pulsing duration 20 msec): 150 sec; ls
(pulsing duration 100 msec): 200 sec; satellite weight: 3500 !bf; satellite diameter:
8 ft; satellite internal density distribution is essentially uniform; disturbing torques,
Y- and Z-axes: 0.00005 ft-lbf average; disturbing torque, for X-axis: 0.001 ft-lbf
average; distance between thrust chamber axes: 8 ft; maximum allowable satellite
pointing position error: ±1 °. Time interval between pulses is 0.030 sec.
(a) What would be the maximum and minimum vehicle angular drift per hour if no
correction torque were applied?
Answers: 0.466 and 0.093 rad.
(b) What is the frequency of pulsing action (how often does an engine pair operate?)
at 20-msec, 100-msec, and 2-sec pulses in order to correct for angular drift?
Discuss which pulsing mode is best and which is impractical.
(c) If the satellite was to remain in orbit for I year with these same disturbances and
had to maintain the accurate positions for 24 hr each day, how much propellant
would be required? Discuss the practicality of storing and feeding such propel
lant.
10. For an ideal multistage launch vehicle with several stages, discuss the following: (a)
the effect on the ideal mission velocity if the second and third stages are not started
immediately but are each allowed to coast for a short period after shutoff and
separation of the prior stage before rocket engine start of the next stage; (b) the
effect on the mission velocity if an engine malfunctions and delivers a few percent
less than the intended thrust but for a longer duration and essentially the full total
impulse of that stage.
11. Given a cylindrically shaped space vehicle (D = Im, height is 0.7 m, average density
is I.I g/cm3 ) with a flat solar cell panel on an arm (mass of 32 kg, effective moment
arm is 1.5 m, effective average area facing normally toward sun is 0.6 m2 ) in a set of
156 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
essentially frictionless bearings and in a low orbit at 160 km altitude with sunlight
being received, on the average, about 60% of the period:
(a) Compute the maximum solar pressure-caused torque and the angular displace
ment this would cause during I day if not corrected.
(b) Using the data from the atmospheric table in Appendix 2 and an arbitrary
average drag coefficient of 1.0 for both the body and the flat plate, compute
the drag force and torque.
(c) Using stored high-pressure air at 14 x 106 N/m2 initial pressure as the propel
lant for attitude control, design an attitude control system to periodically
correct for these two disturbances (F, I,, t, / 1, etc.).
(d) If the vector of the main thrust rocket of the vehicle (total impulse of
67 x I03N-sec) is misaligned and misses the center of gravity by 2 mm, what
correction would be required from the attitude control system? What would
need to be done to the attitude control system inc above to correct for this error
also?
12. A bullet-shaped toy rocket has a pressurized tank of volume V 0, and is partly filled
with water (an incompressible liquid) and partly with compressed air at initial
pressure of 50 psia and initial ambient temperature T 0. Assume no water losses
during start. Also assume that the ambient air pressure is constant for the altitudes
attained by this toy rocket. The empty weight of the toy is 0.30 !bf and it can carry
1.0 lbm of water when the V is half-filled with water. Make other assumptions to
0
suit the calculations.
(a) What type of nozzle is best for this application?
Answer: Converging nozzle.
(b) What are the desired nozzle dimensions to assure vertical takeoff with about
0.5 g acceleration?
(c) What is the specific impulse of the water at start and near propellant exhaus
tion?
(d) What happens if only 50 psia air (no water) is ejected?
(e) What is the approximate proportion of water to air volume for maximum
altitude?
(t) Sketch a simple rocket release and thrust start device and comment on its design
and potential problems.
(g) About how high will it fly vertically?
13. Determine the payload for a single-stage vehicle in Example 4-3. Compare it with
the two-stage vehicle.
Answer: 50.7 kg, which is 18.4% of the payload for a two-stage vehicle.
14. Use the data given in Example 4-3, except that the payload is fixed at 250 kg and
the 6.u is not given but has to be determined for both cases, namely equal-sized
stages and stages of equal mass ratio. What can be concluded from these results and
the results in the example?
15. An airplane that is flying horizontally at a 7000 m altitude, at a speed of 700 km/hr
over flat country, releases an unguided missile with four small tail fins for flight
stability. Determine the impact location (relative to the release point as projected
SYMBOLS 157
onto the earth surface), the impact angle, and the time from release to target.
Assume that the drag causes an average of about 8% reduction in flight velocities.
16. An earth satellite is in an elliptical orbit with the perigee at 600 km altitude and an
eccentricity of e = 0.866. Determine the parameters of the new satellite trajectory, if
a rocket propulsion system is fired in the direction of flight giving an incremental
velocity of 200 m/sec (a) when fired at apogee, (b) when fired at perigee, and (c)
when fired at perigee, but in the opposite direction, reducing the velocity.
17. A sounding rocket (75 kg mass, 0.25 m diameter) is speeding vertically upward at an
altitude of 5000 m and a velocity of 700 m/sec. What is the deceleration in multiples
of g due to gravity and drag? (Use CD from Fig. 4-3 and use Appendix 2).
18. A single-stage weather sounding rocket has a take-off mass of 1020 kg, a sea-level
initial acceleration of 2.00 g, carries 799 kg of useful propellant, has an average
specific gravity of 1.20, a burn duration of 42 sec, a vehicle body shaped like a
cylinder with an L/ D ratio of 5.00 with a nose cone having a half angle of 12
degrees. Assume the center of gravity does not change during the flight. The vehicle
tumbled (rotated in an uncontrolled manner) during the flight and failed to reach its
objective. Subsequent evaluation of the design and assembly processes showed that
the maximum possible thrust misalignment was 1.05 degrees with a maximum
lateral off-set of 1.85 mm. Assembly records show it was 0.7 degrees and 1.1 mm
for this vehicle. Since the propellant flow rate was essentially constant, the thrust at
altitude cutoff was 16.0% larger than at take-off. Determine the maximum torque
applied by the thrust at start and at cutoff. Then determine the approximate max
imum angle through which the vehicle will rotate during powered flight, assuming
no drag. Discuss the result.
SYMBOLS
a major axis of ellipse, m, or acceleration, m/sec2 (ft/sec2 )
A area, m2
b minor axis of ellipse, m
B numerical value of drag integral
c effective exhaust velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
c average effective exhaust velocity, m/sec
CD drag coefficient
CL lift coefficient
d total derivative
D drag force, N (!bf)
e eccentricity of ellipse, e = JI - b2 / a2
e base of natural logarithm (2. 71828)
E energy, J
F thrust force, N (!bf)
Fi final thrust, N
Fg Gravitational attraction force, N
F initial thrust force, N
0
158 FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
g gravitational acceration, m/sec2
g gravitational acceleration at sea level, 9.8066 m/sec2
0
g average gravitational attraction, m/sec2
G universal or Newton's gravity constant, 6.6700 x 1011 m3 /kg-sec2
h altitude, m
hp altitude of rocket at power cutoff, m
Is specific impulse, sec
kd diffuse coefficient of reflectivity
ks specular coefficient of reflectivity
l distance of moment arm, m
L lift force, N (!bf)
m instantaneous mass, kg (lbm)
m final mass after rocket operation, kg
1
mp propellant mass, kg
m initial launching mass, kg
0
m mass flow rate of propellant, kg/sec
Ma angular moment of inertia, kg-m2
l\R mass ratio of vehicle= m /m
1 0
n number of stages
p pressure, N/m2 or Pa (psi)
r radius, m, or distance between the centers of two attracting masses, m
R instantaneous radius from vehicle to center of Earth, m
R Effective earth radius, 6.3742 x 106 m
0
S range, m
time, sec
tP time from launching to power cutoff or time from propulsion start to
thrust termination, sec
t time to target, sec
1
T torque, N-m (ft-lbf)
u vehicle flight velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
ua orbital velocity at apogee, m/sec
up velocity at power cutoff, m/sec, or orbital velocity at perigee, m/sec
u initial or launching velocity, m/sec
0
w weight, N (in some problems, !bf)
Greek Letters
a angle of attack, or angular acceleration, angle/sec2
s (s
propellant mass fraction = mp/m 0)
e
angle between flight direction and horizontal, or angle of incident
radiation, deg or rad
µ, gravity constant for earth, 3.98600 x I 014 m3 /sec2
p mass density, kg/m3
r period of revolution, sec
REFERENCES 159
ifr angle of thrust direction with horizontal
cv angular speed, deg/sec (rad/sec)
Subscripts
e escape condition
f final condition at rocket thrust termination
max maximum
p power cutoff or propulsion termination
s satellite
z zenith
0 initial condition or takeoff condition
REFERENCES
4--1. J. B. Rosser, R. R. Newton, and G. L. Gross, Mathematical Theory of Rocket
Flight, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1947; or F. R. Gantmakher and L. M.
Levin, The Flight of Uncontrolled Rockets, Macmillan, New York, 1964.
4--2. Orbital Flight Handbook, NASA SP33, 1963, Part I: Basic Techniques and Data.
Part 2: Mission Sequencing Problems. Part 3: Requirements.
4--3. V. A. Chobotov (Ed.) Orbital Mechanics, Educational Series, AIAA, 1991.
4--4. J. W. Cornelisse, H. F. R. Schi:iyer, and K. F. Wakker, Rocket Propulsion and
Space Flight Dynamics, Pitman Publishing, London, 1979.
4--5. R. S. Wolf, "Development of a Handbook for Astrobee F Flight Performance
Predictions," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 24, No. I, January
February 1987, pp. 5-6.
4--6. W. Hohmann, Die Erreichbarkeit der Himmelskiirper ( Accessibility of Celestial
Bodies), Oldenburg, Munich, 1925.
4--7. "Spacecraft Aerodynamic Torques," NASA SP 8058, January 1971 (N 71-
25935).
4--8. "Spacecraft Radiation Torques," NASA SP 8027, October 1969 (N 71-24312).
4--9. "Spacecraft Gravitational Torques," NASA SP 8024, May 1964 (N 70-23418).
4--10. "Spacecraft Magnetic Torques," NASA SP 8018, March 1969 (N 69-30339).
4--11. W. J. Larson and J. R. Wertz, Space Mission Analysis and Design, Second edition,
published jointly by Microcosm, Inc. and Kluwer Academic Press, 1992.
4--12. J. J. Pocha, An Introduction to Mission Design for Geostationary Satellites,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Hingham, MA 1987, 222 pages.
4--13. M. H. Kaplan, Orbital Spacecraft Dynamics and Control, John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1976.
4-14. J. R. Wertz (Ed.), Spacecraft Attitude Determination and Control, Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Hingham, MA, 1980, 858 pages.
4--15. G. E. Jensen and D. W. Netzer, Tactical Missile Propulsion, Vol. 170, Progress in
Astronautics and Aeronautics, AIAA, 1996.
CHAPTER 5
CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In Chapter 3, simplified one-dimensional performance relations were devel
oped. They require a knowledge of the composition of the hot rocket gas
and the properties of the propellant reaction products, such as their combus
tion temperature T 1, average molecular mass ffic, the specific heat ratio or the
enthalpy change (h 1 - h 2). This chapter discusses several theoretical
approaches to determine these thermochemical properties for a given composi
tion of propellant, chamber pressure, nozzle shape, and nozzle exit pressure.
This then allows the determination of performance parameters, such as theo
retical specific impulse or exhaust velocity values for chemical rockets.
By knowing the calculated gas temperature, pressure, and gas composition
(e.g., whether reducing or oxidizing species) it is possible to calculate other gas
properties. This knowledge also allows a more intelligent analysis and selection
of materials for chamber and nozzle structures. Heat transfer analyses require
the determination of the specific heats, thermal conductivity, and specific heat
ratio for the gas mixture. The calculated exhaust gas composition forms the
basis for estimating environmental effects, such as the potential spreading of a
toxic cloud near a launch site, as discussed in Chapter 20. The exhaust gas
parameters also form the basis for the analysis of exhaust plumes (Chapter 18)
or flames external to the nozzle.
With the advent of digital computers it has been possible to solve the set of
equations involving mass balance, energy balance, or thermodynamic and che
mical equilibria of complex systems with a variety of propellant ingredients.
This chapter is intended to introduce the basic approach to this theoretical
analysis, so the reader can understand the thermodynamic and chemical basis
of the several computer programs that are in use today. This chapter does not
160
5.1. BACKGROUND AND FUNDAMENTALS 161
describe any specific computer analysis programs. However, it discusses which
of the physical phenomena or chemical reactions can or cannot be adequately
simulated by computer analysis.
The reader is referred to Refs. 5-1 to 5-5 for general chemical and thermo
dynamic background and principles. For a detailed description of the properties
of each of the possible reactant and reaction products, see Refs. 5-6 to 5-12.
All of these theoretical analyses are only approximations of what really
happens in rocket combustion and nozzle flow, and they all require some
simplifying assumptions. As more of the different phenomena are understood
and mathematically simulated, the analysis approach and the computer imple
mentation become more sophisticated, but also more complex. The 11 assump
tions made in Section 3.1 for an ideal rocket are valid here also, but only for a
quasi-one-dimensional flow. However, some of the more sophisticated analyses
can make one or more of these assumptions unnecessary. The analysis is
usually divided into two somewhat separate sets of calculations:
I. The combustion process is the first part. It usually occurs in the combus
tion chamber at essentially constant chamber pressure (isobaric) and the
resulting gases follow Dalton's law. The chemical reactions or the com
bustions occur very rapidly. The chamber volume is assumed to be large
enough and the residence time in the chamber long enough for attaining
chemical equilibrium in the chamber.
2. The nozzle gas expansion process constitutes the second set of calcula
tions. The fully reacted, equilibrated gas combustion products enter the
nozzle and undergo an adiabatic expansion in the nozzle. The entropy
remains constant during a reversible (isentropic) nozzle expansion, but
in real nozzle flows it increases slightly.
The principal chemical reactions occur inside the combustion chamber of a
liquid propellant rocket engine or inside the grain cavity of a solid propellant
rocket motor, usually within a short distance from the burning surface. These
chamber combustion analyses are discussed further in Chapters 9 and 13.
However, some chemical reactions also occur in the nozzle as the gases expand;
the composition of the reaction products can therefore change in the nozzle, as
described in this chapter. A further set of chemical reactions can occur in the
exhaust plume outside the nozzle, as described in Chapter 18; many of the same
basic thermochemical analysis approaches described in this chapter also apply
to exhaust plumes.
5.1. BACKGROUND AND FUNDAMENTALS
The principle of chemical reaction or combustion of one or more fuels with one
or more oxidizing reactants is the basis of chemical rocket propulsion. The heat
162 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
liberated in this reaction transforms the propellants (reactants) into hot gas
eous reaction products, which in turn are thermodynamically expanded in a
nozzle to produce thrust.
The chemical reactants or propellants can initially be either liquid or solid
and occasionally also gaseous. The reaction products are usually gaseous, but
with some propellants one or more reactant species remain in the solid or liquid
phase. For example, with aluminized solid propellants, the chamber reaction
gases contain liquid aluminum oxide and the colder gases in the nozzle exhaust
contain solid, condensed aluminum oxide particles. For some of the chemical
species, therefore, the analysis must consider as many as all three phases and
the energy changes for the phase transitions must be included. If the amount of
solid or liquid in the exhaust is small and the particles are small, then to assume
a perfect gas introduces only small errors.
It is necessary to accurately know the chemical composition of the propel
lants and their relative proportion. In liquid propellant this means the mixture
ratio and the major propellant impurities; in gelled or slurried liquid propel
lants it also includes suspended or dissolved solid materials; and in solid pro
pellants it means all the ingredients, their proportions and impurities and phase
(some ingredients, such as plasticizers, can be in a liquid state).
Dalton's law applies to the gas resulting from the combustion. It states that
a mixture of gases at equilibrium exerts a pressure that is the sum of the partial
pressures of the individual gases, all at the same temperature. The subscripts a,
b, c, etc. refer to individual gas constituents.
P = Pa + Pb + Pc + · · · (5-1)
(5-2)
=
The perfect gas equation p V RT applies very closely to high temperature
gases. Here Vis the specific volume or the volume per unit mass of gas mixture,
and the gas constant R for the mixture is obtained by dividing the universal gas
constant R' (8314.3J/kg-mol-K) by the average molecular mass 9Jl (often erro
neously called the molecular weight) of the gas mixture. Using Dalton's law,
Eq. 5-1 can be rewritten
The volumetric proportions of gas species in a gas mixture are determined from
the molar concentration or molar fractions, n, expressed as kg-mo! for a parti
1
cular species j per kg of mixture. If n is the total number of kg-mo! of species j
per kilogram of uniform gas mixture, then
(5-4)
5.1. BACKGROUND AND FUNDAMENTALS 163
where nj is the kg-mo! of species j per kilogram of mixture, m is the number of
different gaseous species present in the equilibrium combustion gas products.
The effective average molecular mass 9Jl of a gas mixture is then
(5-5)
There are n possible species which enter into the relationship and of these
only m are gases, so n - m represents the number of condensed species. The
molar specific heat for a gas mixture at constant pressure CP can be determined
from the individual gas molar fractions nj and their molar specific heats as
shown by Eq. 5-6. The specific heat ratio k of the mixture can be determined by
a similar summation or from Eq. 5-7.
~m n(C )·
(C
p
) mi.
x
= L..; ~= ml ;
n
P; (5-6)
L..;=l J
k mix = (C (C ) p .) m _i x R, (5-7)
p mix
When a chemical reaction goes to completion, that is, all of the reactants are
consumed and transformed into reaction products, the reactants are in stoichio
metric proportions. For example, consider this reaction:
(5-8)
All the hydrogen and oxygen are fully consumed to form the single product
water vapor-without any reactant residue of either hydrogen or oxygen. In
!
this case it requires 1 mo! of the H and mole of the 0 to obtain 1 mo! of
2 2
H 0. On a mass basis this stoichiometric mixture requires half of 32.0 kg of 0
2 2
and 2 kg of H 2, which are in the stoichiometric mixture mass ratio of 8: 1. The
release of energy per unit mass of propellant mixture and the combustion
temperature are highest at or near the stoichiometric mixture.
Rocket propulsion systems usually do not operate with the proportion of
their oxidizer and fuel in the stoichiometric mixture ratio. Instead, they usually
operate fuel-rich because this allows lightweight molecules such as hydrogen to
remain unreacted; this reduces the average molecular mass of the reaction
products, which in turn increases the specific impulse (see Eq. 3-16). For rock
ets using H and 0 propellants the best operating mixture mass ratio for high
2 2
performance rocket engines is typically between 4.5 and 6.0, not at the stoi
chiometric value of 8.0.
164 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
Equation 5-8 is a reversible chemical reaction; by adding energy to the H 0
2
the reaction can be made to go backward to create H and 0 and the arrow in
2 2
the equation would be reversed. The decompositions of solid propellants into
reaction product gases are irreversible chemical reactions, as is the reaction of
liquid propellants burning to create gases. However, reactions among combus
tion product gases are usually reversible.
Chemical equilibrium exists in reversible chemical reactions when the rate of
forming products is exactly equal to the reverse reaction of forming reactants
from the products. Once this equilibrium is reached, no further changes in
concentration can take place. In Equation 5-8 all three gases would be present
and their relative proportions would depend on the pressure, temperature, and
initial mixture.
The heat of formation 11 H0 is the energy released (or absorbed), or the
1
value of enthalpy change, when I mole of a chemical compound is formed
from its constituent atoms or elements at I bar (100,000 Pa) and isothermally at
298.15 K or 25°C. The 11 implies that it is an energy change. The subscript f
refers to formation and the superscript O means that each product or reactant
substance is at its thermodynamic standard state and at the reference pressure
and temperature. By convention, the heat of formation of the gaseous elements
(e.g., H 2, 0 2, Ar, Xe, etc.) is set to zero at these standard conditions of tem
perature and pressure. Typical values of 11 H0 and other properties are given
1
in Table 5-1 for selected species. When heat is absorbed in the formation of a
product, then 11 H0 has a negative value. Earlier analyses have been made with
1
the standard temperature at other values, such as 273.15 Kand a slightly higher
standard reference pressure of I atm (101,325 Pa).
The heat of reaction 11,H0 is the energy released or absorbed when products
are formed from its reactants at standard reference conditions, namely at I bar
and 25°C. The heat of reaction can be negative or positive, depending on
whether the reaction is exothermic or endothermic. The heat of reaction at
other temperatures or pressures has to be corrected in accordance with the
change in enthalpy. When a species changes from one state to another (e.g.,
liquid becomes gas or vice versa), it may lose or gain energy. In most rocket
propulsion the heat of reaction is determined for a constant-pressure combus
tion process. In general the heat of reaction can be determined from sums of
the heats of formation of the products and the reactants, namely
Here n is the molar fraction of each particular species j. In a typical rocket
1
propellant there are a number of different chemical reactions going on simul
taneously; Equation 5-9 provides the heat of reaction for all of these simulta
neous reactions. For data on heats of formation and heats of reaction, see Refs.
5-7 to 5-13.
TABLE 5-1. Chemical Thermodynamic Properties of Selected Substances at 298.15K (25°C) and 0.1 MPa (I bar)
so
Molar Mass f1. f Ho f1. f G° log K 1 cp
Substance Phase* (g/mol) (kJ/mol) (kJ/mol) (J/mol-K) (J/mol-K)
Al (crystal) s 29.9815 0 0 0 28.275 24.204
Al203 I 101.9612 -1620.567 -1532.025 268.404 67.298 79.015
C (graphite) s 12.011 0 0 0 5.740 8.517
CH4 g 16.0476 -74.873 -50.768 8.894 186.251 35.639
co
g 28.0106 -110.527 -137.163 24.030 197.653 29.142
CO2 g 44.010 -393.522 -394.389 69.095 213.795 37.129
H2 g 2.01583 0 0 0 130.680 28.836
HCl g 36.4610 -92.312 -95.300 16.696 186.901 29.136
HF g 20.0063 -272.546 -274.646 48.117 172.780 29.138
H 0 I 18.01528 -285.830 -237.141 41.546 69.950 75.351
2
H 0 g 18.01528 -241.826 -228.582 40.047 188.834 33.590
2
N2H4 1 32.0451 +50.626 149.440 -28.181 121.544 98.840
N2H4 g 32.0451 +95.353 + 159.232 -27.897 238.719 50.813
NH4Cl04 s 117.485 -295.767 -88.607 15.524 184.180 128.072
ClF g 130.4450 -238.488 -146.725 25.706 310.739 97.165
5
ClF3 g 92.442 -158.866 -118.877 20.827 281.600 63.845
N204 1 92.011 -19.564 +97.521 -17.085 209.198 142.509
N204 g 92.011 9.079 97.787 -17.132 304.376 77.256
N02 g 46.0055 33.095 51.258 -8.980 240.034 36.974
HN03 g 63.0128 -134.306 -73.941 12.954 266.400 53.326
N2 g 28.0134 0 0 0 191.609 29.125
02 g 31.9988 0 0 0 205.147 29.376
NH3 g 17.0305 -45.898 -16.367 2.867 192.774 35.652
..... *s = solid, I = liquid, g = gas. Several species are listed twice, as a liquid and as a gas; the difference is due to evaporation or condensation .
en The molar mass can be in g/g-mol or kg/kg-mo! and CP can be in J/g-mol-K or kJ/kg-mol-K.
UI
Source: Refs. 5-8 and 5-9.
166 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
Various thermodynamic criteria that represent the necessary and sufficient
conditions for an equilibrium to be stable were first advanced by J. W. Gibbs
early in the 20th century; they are based on minimizing the free energy. The
Gibbs free energy G (often called the chemical potential) is a convenient derived
function or property of the state of a chemical material describing its thermo
dynamic potential and is directly related to the internal energy U, the pressure
p, molar volume V, enthalpy h, temperature T, and entropy S. For a single
species j the free energy is defined as G ; it can be determined for specific
1
thermodynamic conditions, for mixtures of gas as well as an individual gas
species.
G = U + pV - TS= h - TS (5-10)
For most materials used as rocket propellant the free energy has been deter
mined and tabulated as a function of temperature. It can be corrected for
pressure. Its units are J/kg-mol. For a series of different species the mixture
free energy G is
n
G = LGn (5-11)
1 1
j=l
The free energy is a function of temperature and pressure. It is another prop
erty of a material, just like enthalpy or density; only two such independent
parameters are required to characterize a gas condition. The free energy may be
thought of as the tendency or driving force for a chemical material to enter into
a chemical (or physical) change. Although it cannot be measured directly,
differences in chemical potential can be measured. When the chemical potential
of the reactants is higher than that of the likely products, a chemical reaction
can occur and the chemical composition can change. The change in free energy
t!,.G for reactions at constant temperature and pressure is the chemical potential
of the products less that of the reactants.
m n
t!,.G = I:[nj(t!,,.1G0 ))products - I:rn1(1!,,.1G0 ))reactants (5-12)
j=I j=l
Here the superscript m gives the number of gas species in the combustion
products, the superscript n gives the number of gas species in the reactants,
and the t!,.G represents the maximum energy that can be "freed" to do work on
an "open" system where mass enters and leaves the system. At equilibrium the
free energy is a minimum; at its minimum a small change in mixture fractions
causes almost no change in t!,,.G and the free energies of the products and the
reactants are essentially equal. Then
dt!,.G/dn=O (5-13)
5.1. BACKGROUND AND FUNDAMENTALS 167
and a curve of molar concentration n versus !').G would have a minimum.
If reacting propellants are liquid or solid materials, energy will be needed to
change phase, vaporize them, or break them down into other gaseous species.
This energy has to be subtracted from the heat or the energy available to heat
the gases from the reference temperature to the combustion temperature.
Therefore, the values of !1H0 and !').G° for liquid and solid species are different
from those of the same species in a gaseous state. The standard free energy of
formation !'). G0 is the increment in free energy associated with the reaction of
1
forming a given compound or species from its elements at their reference state.
Table 5-2 gives values of !'). H0 and !'). G0 and other properties of carbon
1 1
monoxide as a function of temperature. Similar data for other species can be
obtained from Refs. 5-7 and 5-13. The entropy is another thermodynamic
property of matter that is relative, which means that it is determined as a
change in entropy. In the analysis of isentropic nozzle flow, it is assumed
that the entropy remains constant. It is defined as
(5-14)
and the corresponding integral is
T p
S - S 0 -- C P In - To - R In P- o (5-15)
where the zero applies to the reference state. In an isentropic process, entropy is
constant. For a mixture the entropy is
TABLE ~2. Variation of Thermochemical Data with Temperature for Carbon
Monoxide (CO) as an Ideal Gas
Temp. co p sD H0 - H0(T) t;.JH° t;. J Go log K 1
(K) (J/mol-K) (kJ/mol) (kJ/mol)
0 0 0 -8.671 -113.805 -113.805 00
298.15 29.142 197.653 0 -110.527 -137.163 24.030
500 29.794 212.831 5.931 -110.003 -155.414 16.236
1000 33.183 234.538 21.690 -111.983 -200.275 I 0.461
1500 35.217 248.426 38.850 -115.229 -243.740 8.488
2000 36.250 258.714 56.744 -118.896 -286.034 7.470
2500 36.838 266.854 74.985 -122.994 -327.356 6.840
3000 37.217 273.605 93.504 -127.457 -367.816 6.404
3500 37.493 279.364 112.185 -132.313 -407.497 6.082
4000 37.715 284.386 130.989 -137.537 -446.457 5.830
Source: Refs. 5-8 and 5-9.
168 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
n
S = LS1n1 (5-16)
}=I
Here entropy is in J/kg-mol-K. The entropy for each gaseous species is
(5-17)
For solid and liquid species the last two terms are zero. Here (Si) refers to the
standard state entropy at temperature T. Typical values for entropy are listed
in Tables 5-1 and 5-2.
When a chemical reaction is in equilibrium, an equilibrium constant has been
devised which relates the partial pressures and the molar fractions of the spe
cies. For example, in the general reaction
aA + b B ;== cC + dD (5-18)
a, b, c, and d are the stoichiometric molar concentration coefficients of the
chemical molecules (or atoms) A, B, C, and D. The equilibrium constant K,
when expressed as partial pressures, is a function of temperature.
C d
K - PcPD -c-d+a+b (5-19)
P - P11.Pt Po
Here p is the reference pressure. All pressures are in bars or I 05 Pa. When
0
a+ b = c + d, then KP is independent of pressure. This condition is not valid
for a reaction like Eq. 5-8. In this case the pressure increase will drive the
equilibrium reaction into the direction of fewer moles and in the direction of
absorbing heat if the temperature is increased. For Eq. 5-8 the hydrogen and
oxygen equilibrium relation would be
K --P-HP20 o-l +I+0.5 (5-20)
P -p po.s
H2 0
2
The equilibrium constant can also be expressed as a function of the molar
fractions n because each partial pressure p is equal to the actual pressure p
1
111 =
at which the reaction occurs multiplied by its molar fraction (pi pnj). From
Equation 5-19 the equilibrium constant K can also be expressed as
(5-21)
The equilibrium constant for the chemical formation of a given species from its
elements is K . Typical values of K are shown in Tables 5-1 and 5-2. The free
1 1
5.2. ANALYSIS OF CHAMBER OR MOTOR CASE CONDITIONS 169
energy and the equilibrium constant for the formation of a particular species at
standard conditions from its atomic elements are related, namely
(5-22)
Equations 5-19, 5-20, and 5-22 are often used together with mass balance
and energy balance relations to solve the simultaneous equations; the equili
brium constant K is primarily used when chemical compounds are formed
from their elements.
5.2. ANALYSIS OF CHAMBER OR MOTOR CASE CONDITIONS
The objectives here are to determine the theoretical combustion temperature
and the theoretical composition of the resulting reaction products, which in
turn will allow the determination of the physical properties of the combustion
gases (Cp, k, or p). Before we can make this analysis, some basic data (e.g.,
propellants, their ingredients, desired chamber pressure, or all likely reaction
products) have to be known or postulated. Although the combustion process
really consists of a series of different chemical reactions that occur almost
simultaneously and includes the breakdown of chemical compounds into inter
mediate and subsequently into final products, the analysis is only concerned
with the initial and final conditions, before and after combustion. We will
mention several approaches to the analysis of chamber conditions. In this
section we will first give some definitions of key terms and explain some con
cepts and principles. The first principle concerns the conservation of energy. The
heat created by the combustion is equal to the heat necessary to raise the
resulting gases adiabatically to their final combustion temperature. The heat
of reaction of the combustion l'!..,H has to equal the enthalpy change t,,,H of the
gases.
The energy balance can be thought of as a two-step process. The chemical
reaction occurs instantaneously but isothermally at the reference temperature,
and the resulting energy release then heats the gases from this reference tem
perature to the final combustion temperature. The heat of reaction is
(5-23)
Here l'!..h is the increase in enthalpy for each species multiplied by its molar
fraction, and CP is the molar specific heat at constant pressure.
The second principle is the conservation of mass. The mass of any of the
atomic species present in the reactants before the chemical reaction must be
equal to the mass of the same species in the products. This can be illustrated by
170 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
a more general case of the reaction of Equation 5-8. In this case the reactants
are not in stoichiometric proportion.
In the combustion of hydrogen with oxygen it is possible to form six pro
ducts: water, hydrogen, oxygen, hydroxyl, atomic oxygen, and atomic hydro
gen. In this case all the reactants and products are gaseous. Theoretically, there
could be two additional products: ozone 0 3 and hydrogen peroxide H 20 2;
however, these are unstable materials that do not readily exist at high tempera
ture, and they can be ignored. In chemical notation this can be stated by
The left side shows the condition before and the right side after the reaction.
Since H and 0 can be found on both sides, it means that not all of these
2 2
species are consumed and a portion, namely nH
2
and n 02, will remain
unreacted. With chemical equilibrium at a particular temperature and pressure
the molar concentrations on the right side will remain fixed. Here a, b, nH o,
2
nH no no, nH, and noH are the respective molar fractions or molar quantities
, ,
2 2
of these substances before and after the reaction, and they can be expressed in
kg-mo! per kilogram of propellant reactants or reaction products. The initial
proportions of a and b are usually known. The number of kg-mo! per kilogram
of mixture of each element can be established from this initial mix of oxidizer
and fuel ingredients. For the hydrogen-oxygen relation above, the mass bal
ances would be
l
for hydrogen: 2a = 2nH 0 + 2nH + nH + noH
2 2 (5-25)
for oxygen: 2b = nH o + 2n + no + noH
2 02
The mass balance of Eq. 5-25 provides two more equations for this reaction
(one for each atomic species) in addition to the energy balance equation. There
are six unknown product percentages and an unknown combustion or equili
brium temperature. However, three equations provide a solution for only three
unknowns, say the combustion temperature and the molar fractions of two of
the species. If, for example, it is known that the initial mass mixture ratio of b/a
is fuel rich, so that the combustion temperature will be relatively low, the
percentage of remaining 0 and the percentage of the dissociation products
2
(0, H, and OH) would all be very low and can be neglected. Thus n 0, nH, n 0H,
and n are set to be zero. The solution requires knowledge of the enthalpy
02
change of each of the species, and that information can be obtained from
existing tables, such as Table 5-2 or Refs. 5-8 and 5-9.
In more general form, the mass for any given element must be the same
before and after the reaction. The number of kg-mo! of a given element per
kilogram of reactants and product is equal, or their difference is zero. For any
one atomic species, such as the Hor the O in Eq. 5-25,
5.2. ANALYSIS OF CHAMBER OR MOTOR CASE CONDITIONS 171
J J
[Lm au nj - [ Ln a unj = 0 (5-26)
j= 1 products j= 1 propellants
Here the atomic coefficients au are the number of kilogram atoms of element i
per kg-mo! of species}, and m and n are as defined above. The average mole
cular mass of the products in Eq. 5-5 would be
fill = 2nH 2 + 32n 02 + l 8nH 2o + 16n 0 + nH + 17noH (5-27)
+ + + + +
nH no nH 0 no nH noH
2 2 2
Another way to determine the molar fractions for the equilibrium composition
is to use a factor A that represents the degree of advancement of the chemical
reaction. This factor A has the value of zero for the initial conditions before the
reaction starts and 1.0 for the final conditions, when the reaction is completed
and all the reaction gases are converted to product gases. For the reaction
described by Eq. 5-24, A can be used in this way:
Number of moles of A: nA = aA (5-28)
Number of moles of B: n = b..t
8
Number of moles of C: nc = c(l - ..t) (5-29)
Number of moles of D: n = d(l - ..t)
0
By substituting these molar fractions into the Gibbs free energy equation (Eq.
5-12), then differentiating the expression with respect to ), and setting the
derivative dG/d..t = 0, one can determine the value of A at which G is a mini
mum for the gas mixture. The degree of advancement A then determines the
values of nA, n 8, nc, and n 0 at equilibrium.
The approach used in Ref. 5-13 is commonly used today for thermochemi
cal analysis. It relies on the minimization of the Gibbs free energy and on mass
balance and energy balance equations. As was explained in Eq. 5-12, the
change in the Gibbs free energy function is zero at equilibrium (LlG = 0):
the chemical potential of the gaseous propellants has to equal that of the
gaseous reaction products, which is Eq. 5-12:
(5-30)
To assist in solving this equation a Lagrangian multiplier or a factor of the
degree of the completion of the reaction is often used. An alternative method
for solving for the gas composition, temperature, and gas properties is to use
the energy balance (Eq. 5-23) together with several mass balances (Eq. 5-26)
and equilibrium relationships (Eq. 5-21).
After assuming a chamber pressure and setting up the energy balance, mass
balances, and equilibrium relations, one method of solving all the equations is
172 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
to estimate a combustion temperature and then solve for the various values of
n . Then a balance has to be achieved between the heat of reaction t-.,H0 and
1
the heat absorbed by the gases, H~ - Hg, to go from the reference temperature
to the combustion temperature. If they do not balance, another value of the
combustion temperature is chosen until there is convergence and the energy
balances.
The energy release efficiency, sometimes called the combustion efficiency, can
now be defined as the ratio of the actual change in enthalpy per unit propellant
mixture to the calculated change in enthalpy necessary to transform the pro
pellants from the initial conditions to the products at the chamber temperature
and pressure. The actual enthalpy change can be evaluated if the initial pro
pellant condition and the actual composition and the temperature of the com
bustion gases are measured. Experimental measurements of combustion
temperature and gas composition are difficult to perform accurately, and the
combustion efficiency is therefore actually evaluated only in rare instances. The
combustion efficiency in liquid propellant rocket thrust chambers depends on
the method of injection and mixing and increases with increased combustion
temperature. In solid propellants the combustion efficiency is a function of the
grain design, the propellant, and the degree of mixing between the several solid
constituents. Actual measurements on well designed rocket propulsion systems
indicate efficiency values of 94 to 99%. These high values indicate that the
combustion is essentially complete, that very little, if any, unreacted propellant
remains, and that chemical equilibrium is indeed established.
The number of compounds or species in the exhaust can be 50 or more with
solid propellants or with liquid propellants that have certain additives. The
number of nearly simultaneous chemical reactions that have to be considered
can easily exceed 150. Fortunately, many of these chemical species are present
only in very small amounts and can usually be neglected.
5.3. ANALYSIS OF NOZZLE EXPANSION PROCESSES
There are several methods for analyzing the nozzle flow, depending on the
assumptions made for chemical equilibrium, nozzle expansion, particulates,
or energy losses. Several are outlined in Table 5-3.
Once the gases reach the nozzle, they experience an adiabatic, reversible
expansion process which is accompanied by a drop in temperature and pressure
and a conversion of thermal energy into kinetic energy. Several increasingly
more complicated methods have been used for the analysis of the process. For
the simple case of frozen equilibrium and one-dimensional flow the state of the
gas throughout expansion in the nozzle is fixed by the entropy of the system,
which is presumed to be invariant as the pressure is reduced to the value
assigned to the nozzle exit plane. All the assumptions listed in Chapter 3 for
an ideal rocket are also valid here. Again, the effects of friction, divergence
angle, heat exchange, shock waves, or nonequilibrium are neglected in the
5.3. ANALYSIS OF NOZZLE EXPANSION PROCESSES 173
simple cases, but are considered in the more sophisticated solutions. The con
densed (liquid or solid) phases are again assumed to have zero volume and to
be in kinetic as well as thermal equilibrium with the gas flow. This implies that
particles or droplets are very small in size, move at the same velocity as the gas
stream, and have the same temperature as the gas at all places in the nozzle.
The chemical equilibrium during expansion in the nozzle can be analytically
regarded in the following ways:
I. When the composition is invariant throughout the nozzle, there are no
chemical reactions or phase changes and the product composition at the
nozzle exit is identical to that of its chamber condition. The results are
known as frozen equilibrium rocket performance. This method usually is
simple, but underestimates the performance, typically by I to 4%.
2. Instantaneous chemical equilibrium among all molecular species is
maintained under the continuously variable pressure and temperature
conditions of the nozzle expansion process. Thus the product composi
tion shifts; similarly, instantaneous chemical reactions, phase changes or
equilibria occur between gaseous and condensed phases of all species in
the exhaust gas. The results so calculated are called shifting equilibrium
performance. The gas composition mass percentages are different in the
chamber and the nozzle exit. This method usually overstates the perfor
mance values, such as c* or I,, typically by I to 4%. Here the analysis is
more complex.
3. The chemical reactions do not occur instantaneously, but even though
the reactions occur rapidly they require a finite time. The reaction rates
of specific reactions can be estimated; the rates are usually a function of
temperature, the magnitude of deviation from the equilibrium molar
composition, and the nature of the chemicals or reactions involved.
The values of T, c*, or / for these types of equilibrium analysis usually
5
are between those of frozen and instantaneously shifting equilibria. This
approach is almost never used, because of the lack of good data on
reaction rates with multiple simultaneous chemical reactions.
For an axisymmetric nozzle, both one- and two-dimensional analyses can be
used. The simplest nozzle flow analysis is one-dimensional, which means that
all velocities and temperatures or pressures are equal at any normal cross
section of an axisymmetric nozzle. It is often satisfactory for preliminary esti
mates. In a two-dimensional analysis the velocity, temperature, density, and/or
Mach number do not have a flat profile and vary somewhat over the cross
sections. For nozzle shapes that are not bodies of revolution (e.g., rectangular,
scarfed, or elliptic) a three-dimensional analysis can be performed.
If solid particles or liquid droplets are present in the nozzle flow and if the
particles are larger than about 0.1 µm average diameter, there will be a thermal
lag and velocity lag. The solid particles or liquid droplets do not expand like a
174 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
TABLE 5--3. Typical Steps and Alternatives in the Analysis of Rocket
Thermochemical Processes in Nozzles
Step Process Method/Implication/ Assumption
Nozzle inlet Same as chamber exit; need to know For simpler analyses assume the
condition T 1,p 1, v 1, H, c*, p 1, etc. flow to be uniformly mixed and
steady.
Nozzle An adiabatic process, where flow is 1. Simplest method is inviscid
expansion accelerated and thermal energy is isentropic expansion flow with
converted into kinetic energy. constant entropy.
Temperature and pressure drop 2. Include internal weak shock waves;
drastically. Several different no longer a truly isentropic
analyses have been used with process.
different specific effects. Can use 3. If solid particles are present, they
one-, two-, or three-dimensional will create drag, thermal lag, and a
flow pattern. hotter exhaust gas. Must assume an
average particle size and optical
surface properties of the
particulates. Flow is no longer
isentropic.
4. Include viscous boundary layer
effects and/or non-uniform velocity
profile.
Often a simple single correction factor is used with one-dimensional analyses to correct the
nozzle exit condition for items 2, 3, and/or 4 above. Computational fluid dynamic codes with
finite element analyses have been used with two- and three-dimensional nozzle flow.
Chemical Due to rapid decrease in T and p, I. Frozen equilibrium; no change in
equilibrium the equilibrium composition can gas composition; usually gives low
during nozzle change from that in the chamber. performance.
expansion The four processes listed in the 2. Shifting equilibrium or
next column allow progressively instantaneous change in
more realistic simulation and composition; usually overstates the
require more sophisticated performance slightly.
techniques. 3. Use reaction time rate analysis to
estimate the time to reach
equilibrium for each of the several
chemical reactions; some rate
constants are not well known;
analysis is more complex.
4. Use different equilibrium analysis
for boundary layer and main
inviscid flow; will have nonuniform
gas temperature, composition, and
velocity profiles.
5.3. ANALYSIS OF NOZZLE EXPANSION PROCESSES 175
TABLE 5-3. ( Continued)
Method/Implication/Assumption
Step Process
Heat release in Recombination of dissociated Heat released in subsonic portion of
nozzle molecules (e.g., H + H = H 2) and nozzle will increase the exit velocity.
exothermic reactions due to Heating in the supersonic flow
changes in equilibrium portion of nozzle can increase the
composition cause an internal exit temperature but reduce the exit
heating of the expanding gases. Mach number.
Particulates release heat to the
gas.
Nozzle shape Can use straight cone, bell-shaped, Must know or assume a particular
and size or other nozzle contour; bell can nozzle configuration. Calculate bell
give slightly lower losses. Make contour by method of
correction for divergence losses characteristics. Use Eq. 3-34 for
and nonuniformity of velocity divergence losses in conical nozzle.
profile. Most analysis programs are one- or
two-dimensional. Unsymmetrical
non-round nozzles may need three
dimensional analysis.
Gas properties The relationships governing the Either use perfect gas laws or, if some
behavior of the gases apply to of the gas species come close to
both nozzle and chamber being condensed, use real gas
conditions. As gases cool in properties.
expansion, some species may
condense.
Nozzle exit Will depend on the assumptions Need to know the nozzle area ratio or
conditions made above for chemical nozzle pressure ratio. For quasi
equilibrium, nozzle expansion, one-dimensional and uniform
and nozzle shape/contour. nozzle flow, see Eqs. 3-25 and 3-
Assume no jet separation. 26. If v is not constant over the
2
Determine velocity profile and the exit area, determine effective
pressure profile at the nozzle exit average values of v 2 and p 2. Then
plane. If pressure is not uniform calculate profiles of T, p, etc. For
across a section it will have some nonuniform velocity profile, the
cross flow. solution requires an iterative
approach. Can calculate the gas
conditions (T, p, etc.) at any point
in the nozzle.
Calculate specific Can be determined for different Can be determined for average values
impulse altitudes, pressure ratios, mixture of v 2, p 2, and p 3 based on Eqs. 2-6,
ratios, nozzle area ratios, etc. 3-35, and/or 2-14.
176 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
gas; their temperature decrease depends on losing energy by convection or
radiation, and their velocity depends on the drag forces exerted on the particle.
Larger-diameter droplets or particles are not accelerated as rapidly as the
smaller ones and flow at a velocity lower than that of the adjacent accelerating
gas. Also, the particulates are hotter than the gas and provide heat to the gas.
While these particles contribute to the momentum of the exhaust mass, they are
not as efficient as an all-gaseous exhaust flow. For composite solid propellants
with aluminum oxide particles in the exhaust gas, the loss due to particles could
typically be 1 to 3%. The analysis of a two- or three-phase flow requires
knowledge of or an assumption about the nongaseous matter, the sizes (dia
meters), size distribution, shape (usually assumed to be spherical), optical sur
face properties (for determining the emission/absorption or scattering of
radiant energy), and their condensation or freezing temperatures. Some of
these parameters are not well known. Performance estimates of flows with
particles are explained in Section 3-5.
The viscous boundary layer next to the nozzle wall has velocities substan
tially lower than that of the inviscid free stream. The slowing down of the gas
flow near the wall due to the viscous drag actually causes the conversion of
kinetic energy into thermal energy, and thus some parts of the boundary layer
can be hotter than the local free-stream static temperature. A diagram of a two
dimensional boundary layer is shown in Figure 3-16. With turbulence this
boundary layer can be relatively thick in large-diameter nozzles. The boundary
layer is also dependent on the axial pressure gradient in the nozzle, the nozzle
geometry, particularly in the throat region, the surface roughness, or the heat
losses to the nozzle walls. Today, theoretical boundary layer analyses with
unsteady flow are only approximations, but are expected to improve in the
future as our understanding of the phenomena and computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) techniques are validated. The net effect is a nonuniform
velocity and temperature profile, an irreversible friction process in the viscous
layers, and therefore an increase in entropy and a slight reduction (usually less
than 5%) of the kinetic exhaust energy. The slower moving layers adjacent to
the nozzle walls have laminar and subsonic flow.
At the high combustion temperatures a small portion of the combustion gas
molecules dissociate (split into simpler species); in this dissociation process
some energy is absorbed. When energy is released during reassociation (at
lower pressures and temperatures in the nozzle), this reduces the kinetic energy
of the exhaust gas at the nozzle exit. This is discussed further in the next
section.
For propellants that yield only gaseous products, extra energy is released in
the nozzle, primarily from the recombination of free-radical and atomic spe
cies, which become unstable as the temperature is decreased in the nozzle
expansion process. Some propellant products include species that condense
as the temperature drops in the nozzle expansion. If the heat release on con
densation is large, the difference between frozen and shifting equilibrium per
formance can be substantial.
5.3. ANALYSIS OF NOZZLE EXPANSION PROCESSES 177
In the simplest method the exit temperature T is determined for an isen
2
tropic process (frozen equilibrium) by considering the entropy to be constant.
The entropy at the exit is the same as the entropy in the chamber. This deter
mines the temperature at the exit and thus the gas condition at the exit. From
the corresponding change in enthalpy it is then possible to obtain the exhaust
velocity and the specific impulse. For those analysis methods where the nozzle
flow is not really isentropic and the expansion process is only partly reversible,
it is necessary to include the losses due to friction, shock waves, turbulence, and
so on. The result is a somewhat higher average nozzle exit temperature and a
slight loss in ls. A possible set of steps used for the analysis of nozzle processes
is given in Table 5-3.
When the contraction between the combustion chamber (or the port area)
and the throat area is small (Ap/ A 3), the acceleration of the gases in the
1 :::
chamber causes a drop in the effective chamber pressure at the nozzle entrance.
This pressure loss in the chamber causes a slight reduction of the values of c
and ls. The analysis of this chamber configuration is treated in Ref. 5-14 and
some data are briefly shown in Tables 3-2 and 6-4.
Example 5-1. Various experiments have been conducted with a liquid monopropellant
called nitromethane (CH 3N0 2), which can be decomposed into gaseous reaction pro
ducts. Determine the values of T, Wl, k, c*, CF, and I, using the water-gas equilibrium
conditions. Assume no dissociations and no 0 2•
SOLUTION. The chemical reaction for I mo! of reactant can be described as
Neglect other minor products. The mass balances are obtained for each atomic element.
C I= nco +nco,
H 3 = 2nH, + 2nH,o
0 2 = nco + 2nco, + nH,o
= =
N I 2nN, or nN, 0.5
The reaction commonly known as the water-gas reaction is
Its equilibrium constant K, expressed as molar concentrations, is a function of tempera
ture.
=
K _nH_,~o_n_c_o
nH,nco,
The five equations above have six unknowns: namely, the five molar concentrations and
K, which is a function of temperature. Solving for nH, and K:
178 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
(K - i)n~ + (3 - K/2)nH, = 2.25
2
K can be obtained from a table of the water-gas reaction as a function of temperature.
Try T = 2500 K and K = 6.440 and substitute above.
5.440nt - 0.220nH, - 2.25 = 0
then
nH, = 0.664
nH,o = 1.500 - nH, = 0.836
nco, = 0.164 nco = 0.836
0
The heats of formation t,,. H for the various species are listed in the table below [from
1
the JANA F thermochemical tables (Refs. 5-7 and 5-9)]. The heat of reaction is
obtained from Eq. 5-9 in kilojoules per mole. By definition, the heat of formation of
H2 or N2 is zero. From Eq. 5-9,
= 0
t,,.,H° L)nt,,.JH\roducts - (!>,.1H \eactant
= 0.836(-241.8) + 0.164(-393.5) + 0.836(-110.5) - 1.0(-113.1)
= -246kJ/mol
The enthalpy change of the gases going from the reference conditions to the combustion
temperature can also be obtained from tables in Refs. 5-7 and 5-8 and is again listed
below.
Molecular
Species t,,.fH° t,,.h2500 Weight nj
./
N2 0 74.296 28 0.500
H20 -241.826 99.108 18 0.836
H2 0 70.498 2 0.664
co
-110.53 74.985 28 0.836
CO2 -393.522 121.917 44 0.164
CH N02 -113.1 61 1.000
3
The gas enthalpy change of the hot gas in the combustion chamber is numerically equal
to the heat of formation. Using data from the table,
This is not identical to the 246kJ/mol obtained previously, and therefore a lower tem
perature is to be tried. After one or two iterations the final combustion temperature of
24 70 K will be found where the heat of reaction balances the enthalpy rise. The above
mentioned composition will be approximately the same at the new temperature. The
molecular weight can then be obtained from Eq. 5-5:
5.4. COMPUTER ANALYSIS 179
fill= L n1fill = 28 x 0.5 + 18 x 0.836 + 2 x 0.664 + 28 x 0.836 + 44 x 0.164 = 20.
3
L n 2 x (0.836) + 0.664 + 0.164 + 0.500
1
The specific heat varies with temperature, and average specific heat values cP can be
obtained from each species by integrating
_ Jr";470
=~98 ~cPd-T
C P r247o dT
J29g
Values of cP can be obtained from tables in Ref. 5-7 and, if not done by computer, the
integration can be done graphically. The result is
cP = 41,440 kJ/K-kg-mol/20.3
= 2040 kJ/kg-K
The specific heat ratio is, from Eq. 5-7,
41,440 _
2 5
41440 - 8314 - 1.
With fill, k, and T now determined, the ideal performance of a nitromethane rocket
1
engine can be established from Eqs. 3-16, 3-30, and 3-32 for p = 69atm and
1
p = 1.0 atm. The results are
2
c* = 1525 m/sec
CF= 1.57 (from Fig. 3-6)
c = 1.57 x 1525 = 2394 m/sec
ls = 2394/9.80 = 244 sec
5.4. COMPUTER ANALYSIS
All the analysis discussed in this chapter is done today by computer programs.
Most are based on minimizing the free energy. This is a simpler approach than
relying on equilibrium constants, which was used some years ago. Once the
values of nJ and T are determined, it is possible to calculate the molecular
1
mass of the gases (Eq. 5-5), the average molar specific heats CP by a similar
formula, and the specific heat ratio k from Eqs. 3-6 and 5-7. This then char
acterizes the thermodynamic conditions in the combustion chamber. With
these data we can calculate c*, R, and other parameters of the chamber com
bustion. The nozzle expansion process simulated by computer gives the per
formance (such as ls, c, or A /A and the gas conditions in the nozzle; it
2 1)
usually includes several of the corrections mentioned in Chapter 3. Programs
exist for one-, two-, and three-dimensional flow patterns.
180 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
More sophisticated solutions include a supplementary analysis of combus
tion chamber conditions where the chamber velocities are high (see Ref. 5-14),
a boundary layer analysis, a heat transfer analysis, or a two-dimensional axi
symmetric flow with nonuniform flow properties across any cross section of the
nozzle. Time-dependent chemical reactions in the chamber are usually
neglected, but they can be analyzed by estimating the time rate at which the
reaction occurs; one way is to calculate the time derivative of the degree of
advancement d}.,/dt and then to set this derivative to zero. This is described in
Ref. 5-3.
An example of a commonly used computer program, based on chemical
equilibrium compositions, was developed at the NASA Lewis Laboratory. It
is described in Ref. 5-13, Vols. I and 2. The key assumptions for this
program are one-dimensional forms of the continuity, energy, and momen
tum equations, zero velocity at the forward end of the chamber, isentropic
expansion in the nozzle, using ideal gas laws, and chemical equilibrium in
the combustion chamber. It includes options to use frozen equilibrium and
narrow chambers (for liquid propellant combustion) or port areas with
small cross sections (for solid propellant grains), where the chamber flow
velocities are high, causing an extra pressure loss and a slight loss in
performance.
Table 5-4 shows calculated data for a liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen thrust
chamber taken from an example of this reference. It has shifting equilibrium in
the nozzle flow. The narrow chamber has a cross section that is only a little
larger than the throat area. The large pressure drop in the chamber (approxi
mately 126 psi) is due to the energy needed to accelerate the gas, as discussed in
Section 3.3 and Table 3-2.
5.5. RESULTS OF THERMOCHEMICAL CALCULATIONS
Voluminous results of these machine calculations are available and only a few
samples are indicated here to illustrate typical effects of the variations of
various parameters. In general, high specific impulse or high values of c* can
be obtained if the average molecular weight of the reaction products is low
(usually this implies a formulation rich in hydrogen) or if the available chemi
cal energy (heat of reaction) is large, which means high combustion tempera
tures (see Eq. 3-16).
Values of calculated specific impulse will be higher than those obtained from
firing actual propellants in rocket units. In practice it has been found that the
experimental values are, in general, 3 to 12% lower than those calculated by
the method explained in this chapter. Because the nozzle inefficiencies
explained in Chapter 3 must be considered, only a portion of this correction
(perhaps I to 4%) is due to combustion inefficiencies.
Figures 5-1 to 5-6 indicate the results of performance calculations for the
liquid propellant combination, liquid oxygen-RP-I. These data are taken from
TABLE 5-4. Calculated Parameters for Liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen Rocket Engine for Four Different Nozzle Expansions
Chamber pressure at injector 773.3 psia or 53.317 bar; c* = 2332.1 m/sec; shifting equilibrium nozzle flow mixture ratio 02/H2 = 5.551;
chamber to throat area ratio Ai/A1 = 1.580.
Parameters
Location Injector face Comb. end Throat Exit Exit Exit Exit
Pinj/P 1.00 1.195 1.886 10.000 100.000 282.15 709.71
T (K) 3389 3346 3184 2569 1786 1468 1219
WI (molec. mass) 12.7 12.7 12.8 13.1 13.2 13.2 13.2
k (spec. heat ratio) 1.14 1.14 1.15 1.17 1.22 1.24 1.26
CP (spec. heat, kJ/kg-K) 8.284 8.250 7.530 4.986 3.457 3.224 3.042
M (Mach number) 0.00 0.413 1.000 2.105 3.289 3.848 4.379
A2/A1 1.580a 1.580a 1.000 2.227 11.52 25.00 50.00
c (m/sec) NA NA 2879h 3485 4150 4348 4487
v2 (m/sec) NA NA 1537h 2922 3859 4124 4309
Mole fractions of gas mixture
H 0.03390 0.03336 0.02747 0.00893 0.00024 0.00002 0.00000
H02 0.00002 0.00001 0.00001 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
H2 0.29410 0.29384 0.29358 0.29659 0.30037 0.30050 0.30052
H20 0.63643 0.63858 0.65337 0.68952 0.69935 0.69948 0.69948
H202 0.00001 0.00001 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
0 0.00214 0.00204 0.00130 0.00009 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
OH 0.03162 0.03045 0.02314 0.00477 0.00004 0.00000 0.00000
02 0.00179 0.00172 0.00113 0.00009 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
"Chamber contraction ratio A /A,.
1
hif cut off at throat.
..... c is the effective exhaust velocity in a vacuum .
c...o.. v
2
is the nozzle exit velocity at optimum nozzle expansion.
NA means not applicable.
182 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
P 1 = 1000 psia
Liquid oxygen/RP-I (CH 1 953 )
P 2 = 14.696 psia
:u,:
g 300
!
2001
~ 260
Q)
Q.
Cl) ::.::
1850
~
6000 :::,
ffl
ai
~ 1800 5900 EQ.
-!!? Q)
E ~ 5800 I-
•.., 1750 ?
•. ..· 5700 2000
5600
1700
5500 30 I
20 3:
'Molecular mass, chamber 1:;;
Molecular mass, nozzle exit +=----1 10 B
Nozzle
exI
it
temperI
ature,
frI
o zen
o(I)
~~---'-~~..._~---'-~~...L.-~--'-~~......_~~ 0 ~
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
Mixture ratio (oxidizer/fuel)
FIGURE 5-1. Calculated performance analysis of liquid oxygen and hydrocarbon fuel
as a function of mixture ratio.
Refs. 5-7 and 5-8. The RP-I fuel is a narrow-cut hydrocarbon similar to
kerosene with an average of 1.953 mo! of hydrogen for each mole of carbon;
thus it has a nominal formula of CHi. 953. The calculation is limited to a
chamber pressure of I 000 psia. Most of the curves are for optimum area
ratio expansion to atmospheric pressure, namely, I atm or 14.696 psia, and a
limited range of oxidizer-to-fuel mixture ratios.
For maximum specific impulse, Figs. 5-1 and 5--4 show an optimum mixture
ratio of approximately 2.3 (kg/sec of oxidizer flow divided by kg/sec of fuel
flow) for frozen equilibrium expansion and 2.5 for shifting equilibrium with gas
expansion to sea level pressure. The maximum values of c* are at slightly
different mixture ratios. This optimum mixture ratio is not the value for high
est temperature, which is usually fairly close to the stoichiometric value. The
stoichiometric mixture ratio is more than 3.0; much of the carbon is burned to
CO and almost all of the hydrogen to H 0.
2 2
5.5. RESULTS OF THERMOCHEMICAL CALCULATIONS 183
Mixture ratio (oxidizer /fuel)
FIGURE 5-2. Calculated chamber gas composition for liquid oxygen and hydrocarbon
fuel as a function of mixture ratio. Aggressive gases, such as 0 2, 0, or OH, can cause
oxidation of the wall materials in the chamber and the nozzle.
Because shifting equilibrium makes more enthalpy available for conversion
to kinetic energy, it gives higher values of performance (higher / or c*) and
5
higher values of nozzle exit temperature for the same exit pressure (see Fig. 5-
1) . The influence of mixture ratio on chamber gas composition is evident from
Fig. 5-2. A comparison with Fig. 5-3 indicates the marked changes in the gas
composition as the gases are expanded under shifting equilibrium conditions.
The influence of the degree of expansion, or of the nozzle exit pressure on the
gas composition, is shown in Fig. 5-6. As the gases are expanded to higher area
ratios and lower exit pressure (or higher pressure ratios) the performance
increases; however, the relative increase diminishes as the pressure ratio is
further increased (see Figs. 5-5 and 5-6).
Dissociation of molecules requires considerable energy and causes a decrease
in the combustion temperature, which in turn can reduce the specific impulse.
184 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
P1 = 1000 psia
Liquid oxygen-RP·l(CH ,. 9,3)
45 P2 = 14.696psia
c
~ 301--~---1,-~-+-~-/-+-~--l-~'~--+-~~-1---~• . ....-~
aQ).
0Q )
E 25'--~--"-~~'V-~~+-~
2C:
·;;;
&
201--~--l--F-~-+-~,--l---~--!-,~~-+--~~-I--'
E
8
Mixture ratio (oxidizer /fuel\
FIGURE 5-3. Calculated nozzle exit gas composition for shifting equilibrium condi
tions as a function of mixture ratio. Breakdown into 0, OH, or H and.free 0 occurs
2
only at the higher temperatures or higher mixture ratios.
Dissociation of the reaction products increases as the chamber temperature
rises, and decreases with increasing chamber pressure. Atoms or radicals
such as monatomic O or H and OH are formed, as can be seen from Fig. 5-
2; some unreacted 0 also remains at the higher mixture ratios and very high
2
combustion temperatures. As the gases are cooled in the nozzle expansion, the
dissociated species react again to form molecules and release heat into the
flowing gases. As can be seen from Fig. 5-3, only a small percentage of dis
sociated species persists at the nozzle exit and only at the high mixture ratio,
where the exit temperature is relatively high. (See Fig. 5-1 for exit temperatures
with shifting equilibria). Heat released in a supersonic flow actually reduces the
Mach number.
Results of calculations for several different liquid and solid propellant com
binations are given in Tables 5-5 and 5-6. For the liquid propellant combina
tions, the listed mixture ratios are optimum and their performance is a
5.5. RESULTS OF THERMOCHEMICAL CALCULATIONS 185
-+---+-----+-1 ------+---I
Is 300
i t--........
8 2801-::..r---+~~-+-~~+-~--+~~_..._~~+-~~
]! P/P = 34.02
.f 2
2fiOL-~..J'.:'.:'.'.:::j::==:=r====:t:::::t::::t'~~
0
~
e~n 240r-~-+-~--+~~+-~-+-~---+~~-+-~--I
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
Mixture ratio (oxidizer/fuel)
FIGURE 5-4. Variation of theoretical specific impulse with mixture ratio and pressure
ratio, calculated for frozen equilibrium.
maximum. For solid propellants, practical considerations (such as propellant
physical properties) do not always permit the development of a satisfactory
propellant grain when the ingredients are mixed in optimum performance
proportions (insufficient binder); therefore the values listed for solid propel
lants in Table 5-6 correspond in part to practical formulations with reasonable
physical and ballistic properties.
Calculated data obtained from Ref. 5-13 are presented in Tables 5-7 to 5-9
for a specific solid propellant to indicate typical variations in performance or
gas composition. This particular propellant consists of 60% ammonium per
chlorate (NH 4Cl0 4), 20% pure aluminum powder, and 20% of an organic
polymer of an assumed chemical composition, namely, C 3.10N 0.84H 5.8. Table
5-7 shows the variation of several performance parameters with different
chamber pressures expanding to atmospheric exit pressure. The area ratios
listed are optimum for this expansion with shifting equilibrium. The exit
enthalpy, exit entropy, thrust coefficient, and the specific impulse also consider
shifting equilibrium conditions. The characteristic velocity c* and the chamber
molecular mass are functions of chamber conditions only. Table 5-8 shows the
variation of gas composition with chamber pressure. Some of the reaction
products are in the liquid phase, such as Al 20 3. Table 5-9 shows the variation
of nozzle exit characteristics and composition for shifting equilibria as a func-
...
a0: ,, 200 420 4200
Mixture ratio = 2.20
P2 =P3
100 liquid oxygen-RP-l(CH,..., ) 3600
80
60
300 3000
40
u
5l
j. :,.:
.Q 20 : a, . 240 2400 • t 2.4
~ _!; .a
<" Q' ) ;u
E
8I.'! .
10 u 180 1800 E 1.8
8. Q)
8 en I- c
Q)
6 ~
120 1200 1.2 ~
4 0
t,
.:c::,
I-
60 600 0.6
2
OL--~~...L..J.....L...i......--'---l~J......~L-~~..L.J.....L...JL.L...J......J...___J~-----l~~~L.L.L..L...J......L.....l....--L...:::!1lllolO 0.0
2000 1000 600 400 200 100 60 40 20 10 6 4 2
Pressure ratio, p/p
2
FIGURE 5--5. Variation of calculated parameters with pressure ratio for liquid oxygen~hydrocarbon propellant at a
mixture ratio of 2.20. An increase in pressure ratio is due to an increase in chamber pressure, a decrease of nozzle exit
pressure (larger area ratio and higher altitude), or both.
5.5. RESULTS OF THERMOC,H~EMI CAL CALCULATIONS 187
42
I_
36
L----[lLLL- H,~
v --
,....v
, ,......_.. ~ i"---
30
~~,
s$ll+t .....
24 ~.rr
............
r'--
~:-,. .... .J. ..... ...............
18 ................... ILL[[-!-__ IH2'
___ 1co,\ 111 I I
I
12 -
I
~ Mixture ratio := 2.20
6 LP i1q u= i d1 o0 x0 y0 g p es n,a - RP-l(CH,,. 3) I
1
Olh,~ ('""1-
I I tP'
0 , ' I
2000 l 000 600 400 200 100 60 40 20 10 6 4 2
Pressure ratio, P1IP2
FIGURE 5-6. Variation of exhaust gas composition at nozzle exit with pressure ratio at
a fixed mixture ratio and for shifting equilibrium. For frozen equilibrium the composi
tion would be the same as in the chamber, as shown in Fig. 5-2.
tion of exit pressure or pressure ratio for a fixed value of chamber pressure.
Table 5-9 shows how the composition is shifted during expansion in the nozzle
and how several of the species present in the chamber have disappeared at the
nozzle exit. These three tables show theoretical results calculated on a compu
ter; some of the thermodynamic properties of the reactants and reaction pro
ducts probably do not warrant the indicated high accuracy of five significant
figures which are obtained from the computer. In the analysis for chemical
ingredients of this solid propellant, approximately 76 additional reaction pro
ducts were considered in addition to the major product species. This includes,
for example, CN, CH, CCI, Cl, NO, and so on. Their calculated mole fractions
were very small and therefore they have been neglected and are not included in
Table 5-8 or 5-9.
Calculations of this type are useful in estimating performance Us, c*, Cp, E,
etc.) for a particular chamber pressure and nozzle exit pressure, and knowledge
of the gas composition, as indicated by the previous figures and tables, permits
a more detailed estimate of other design parameters, such as gas-film properties
for heat transfer determination, radiation characteristics of the flame inside
and outside the thrust chambers, and the acoustic characteristics of the
gases. Performance data calculated for hybrid propellants are presented briefly
in Chapter 15.
...
co TABLE 5-5. Theoretical Performance of Liquid Rocket Propellant Combinations
co
Mixture Ratio Average Chamber Chamber I, (sec)
Specific Temp. c' 9Jl
Oxidizer Fuel By Mass By Volume Gravity (K) (m/sec) (kg/mo!) Shifting Frozen k
Oxygen Methane 3.20 1.19 0.81 3526 1835 296
3.00 I.II 0.80 3526 1853 311
Hydrazine 0.74 0.66 1.06 3285 1871 18.3 301 1.25
0.90 0.80 1.07 3404 1892 19.3 313
Hydrogen 3.40 0.21 0.26 2959 2428 8.9 386 1.26
4.02 0.25 0.28 2999 2432 10.0 389.5
RP-I 2.24 1.59 1.01 3571 1774 21.9 285.4 1.24
2.56 1.82 1.02 3677 1800 23.3 300
UDMH 1.39 0.96 0.96 3542 1835 19.8 295 1.25
1.65 1.14 0.98 3594 1864 21.3 310
Fluorine Hydrazine 1.83 1.22 1.29 4553 2128 18.5 334 1.33
2.30 1.54 1.31 4713 2208 19.4 365
Hydrogen 4.54 0.21 0.33 3080 2534 8.9 389 1.33
7.60 0.35 0.45 3900 2549 11.8 410
Nitrogen Hydrazine 1.08 0.75 1.20 3258 1765 19.5 283 1.26
tetroxide 1.34 0.93 1.22 3152 1782 20.9 292
50% UDMH- 1.62 1.01 1.18 3242 1652 21.0 278 1.24
50% hydrazine 2.00 1.24 1.21 3372 1711 22.6 289
RP-I 3.4 I.OS 1.23 3290 24.1 297 1.23
MMH 2.15 1.30 1.20 3396 1747 22.3 289
1.65 1.00 1.16 3200 1591 21.7 278 1.23
Red fuming RP-I 4.1 2.12 1.35 3175 1594 24.6 258 1.22
nitric acid 4.8 2.48 1.33 3230 1609 25.8 269
50% UDMH- 1.73 1.00 1.23 2997 1682 20.6 272 1.22
50% hydrazine 2.20 1.26 1.27 3172 1701 22.4 279
Hydrogen peroxide
(90%) RP-I 7.0 4.01 1.29 2760 21.7 297 1.19
Notes:
Combustion chamber pressure-1000 psia (6895 kN/m2); nozzle exit pressure-14.7 psia (l atm); optimum expansion.
Adiabatic combustion and isentropic expansion of ideal gas
The specific gravity at the boiling point was used for those oxidizers or fuels that boil below 20°C at I atm pressure.
Mixture ratios are for approximate maximum value of f. 1. •
5.5. RESULTS OF THERMOCHEMICAL CALCULATIONS 189
TABLE 5-6. Theoretical Performance of Typical Solid Rocket Propellant
Combinations
Pb T1 c* 9Jl Is k
Oxidizer Fuel (g/cm3t (K) (m/sec)6 (kg/kg-mo!) (sec)6
Ammonium 11 % binder and 1.51 1282 1209 20.1 192 1.26
nitrate 7% additives
Ammonium 18% organic 1.69 2816 1590 25.0 262 1.21
perchlorate polymer binder
78-66% and 4-20%
aluminum
Ammonium 12% polymer 1.74 3371 1577 29.3 266 1.17
perchlorate binder and 4 to
84 to 68% 20% aluminum
a Average specific gravity of solid propellant. b Conditions for f, and c*:
Combustion chamber pressure: 1000 psia
Nozzle exit pressure: 14.7 psia
Optimum nozzle expansion ratio
Frozen equilibrium
In gas generators and preburners (see Section 10.5), for staged combustion
cycle rocket engines (explained in Section 6.5) the gas temperatures are much
lower, to avoid damage to the turbine blades. Typically, the combustion reac
tion gases are at 900 to 1200 K, which is lower than the gas in the thrust
chamber (2900 to 3600 K). The thermochemical analysis of this chapter can
also be applied to gas generators; the results (such as gas temperature T 1, the
specific heat cp, specific heat ratio k, or composition) are used for estimating
turbine inlet conditions or turbine power. Examples are listed in Table 5-10 for
a chamber pressure of 1000 psia. Some species in the gases will not be present
(such as atomic oxygen or hydroxyl), and often real gas properties will need to
be used because some of these gases do not behave as a perfect gas at these
temperatures.
TABLE 5-7. Variation of Calculated Performance Parameters for an Aluminized Ammonium Perchlorate Propellant as a Function of
Chamber Pressure for Expansion to Sea Level (I atm) with Shifting Equilibrium
Chamber pressure (psia) 1500 1000 750 500 200
Chamber pressure (atm) or pressure ratio pJ/p 102.07 68.046 51.034 34.023 13.609
2
Chamber temperature (K) 3346.9 3322.7 3304.2 3276.6 3207.7
Nozzle exit temperature (K) 2007.7 2135.6 2226.8 2327.0 2433.6
Chamber enthalpy (cal/g) -572.17 -572.17 -572.17 -572.17 -572.17
Exit enthalpy (cal/g) -1382.19 -1325.15 -1282.42 -1219.8 -1071.2
Entropy (cal/g-K) 2.1826 2.2101 2.2297 2.2574 2.320
Chamber molecular mass (kg/mo!) 29.303 29.215 29.149 29.050 28.908
Exit molecular mass (kg/mo!) 29.879 29.853 29.820 29.763 29.668
Exit Mach number 3.20 3.00 2.86 2.89 2.32
Specific heat ratio----chamber, k 1.1369 1.1351 1.1337 1.1318 1.1272
Specific impulse, vacuum (sec) 287.4 280.1 274.6 265.7 242.4
Specific impulse, sea level expansion (sec) 265.5 256.0 248.6 237.3 208.4
Characteristic velocity, c* (m/sec) 1532 1529 1527 1525 1517
Nozzle area ratio, A 2/ A/ 14.297 10.541 8.507 8.531 6.300
Thrust coefficient, CF" 1.700 1.641 1.596 1.597 1.529
a At optimum expansion.
5.5. RESULTS OF THERMOCHEMICAL CALCULATIONS 191
TABLE 5-8. Mole Fraction Variation of Chamber Gas Composition with
Combustion Chamber Pressure for a Solid Propellant
Pressure (psia) 1500 1000 750 500 200
Pressure (atm) or 102.07 68.046 51.034 34.023 13.609
pressure ratio
Ingredient
Al 0.00007 0.00009 0.00010 0.00012 0.00018
A!Cl 0.00454 0.00499 0.00530 0.00572 0.00655
A!Cl2 0.00181 0.00167 0.00157 0.00142 0.00112
AIC! 0.00029 0.00023 0.00019 0.00015 0.00009
3
AIH 0.00002 0.00002 0.00002 0.00002 0.00002
A!O 0.00007 0.00009 0.000! l 0.00013 0.00019
A!OC! 0.00086 0.00095 0.00102 0.00112 0.00132
A!OH 0.00029 0.00032 0.00034 0.00036 0.0004!
Al02H 0.00024 0.00026 0.00028 0.00031 0.00036
Al20 0.00003 0.00004 0.00004 0.00005 0.00006
Al20
3
(solid) 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
Al20
3
(liquid) 0.09425 0.09378 0.09343 0.09293 0.09178
co
0.22434 0.22374 0.22328 0.22259 0.22085
COC! 0.00001 0.00001 0.0000! 0.00001 0.00000
CO2 0.00785 0.00790 0.00793 0.00799 0.008 l 0
Cl 0.00541 0.00620 0.0068! 0.00772 0.01002
Cl2 0.00001 0.00001 0.0000! 0.00001 0.00001
H 0.02197 0.02525 0.02776 0.03157 0.04125
HC! 0.12021 0.11900 0.11808 0.11668 0.11321
HCN 0.00003 0.00002 0.0000! 0.00001 0.00000
HCO 0.00003 0.00002 0.00002 0.00002 0.00001
H2 0.32599 0.32380 0.32215 0.31968 0.31362
H20 0.08960 0.08937 0.08916 0.08886 0.08787
NH2 0.00001 0.00001 0.00001 0.00000 0.00000
NH 0.00004 0.00003 0.00002 0.00001 0.00001
3
NO 0.00019 0.00021 0.00023 0.00025 0.00030
N2 0.09910 0.09886 0.09867 0.09839 0.09767
0 0.00010 0.00014 0.00016 0.00021 0.00036
OH 0.00262 0.00297 0.00324 0.00364 0.00458
02 0.00001 0.0000! 0.00002 0.00002 0.00004
.....
co TABLE 5-9. Calculated Variation of Thermodynamic Properties and Exit Gas Composition for an Aluminized Perchlorate Propellant
N =
with p 1500 psia and Various Exit Pressures at Shifting Equilibrium and Optimum Expansion
1
Chamber Throat Nozzle Exit
Pressure (atm) 102.07 58.860 2.000 1.000 0.5103 0.2552 0.1276
Pressure (MPa) 10.556 5.964 0.2064 0.1032 0.0527 0.0264 0.0132
Nozzle area ratio >0.2 1.000 3.471 14.297 23.972 41.111 70.888
Temperature (K) 3346.9 3147.3 2228.5 2007.7 1806.9 1616.4 1443.1
Ratio chamber pressure/local pressure 1.000 1.7341 51.034 102.07 200.00 400.00 800.00
Molecular mass (kg/mo!) 29.303 29.453 29.843 29.879 29.894 29.899 29.900
Composition (mo! % )
Al 0.00007 0.00003 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
AICI 0.00454 0.00284 0.00014 0.00008 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
AICl2 0.00181 0.00120 0.00002 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
AICl 0.00029 0.00023 0.00002 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
3
AIOCI 0.00086 0.00055 0.00001 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
AIOH 0.00029 0.00016 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
Al02H 0.00024 0.00013 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
Al20 0.00003 0.00001 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
Al201 (solid) 0.00000 0.00000 0.09955 0.09969 0.09974 0.09976 0.09976
Al20 (liquid) 0.09425 0.09608 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
3
co
0.22434 0.22511 0.22553 0.22416 0.22008 0.21824 0.21671
CO2 0.00785 0.00787 0.00994 0.01126 0.01220 0.01548 0.01885
Cl 0.00541 0.00441 0.00074 0.00028 0.00009 0.00002 0.00000
H 0.02197 0.01722 0.00258 0.00095 0.00030 0.00007 0.00001
HCI 0.12021 0.12505 0.13635 0.13707 0.13734 0.13743 0.13746
H2 0.32599 0.33067 0.34403 0.34630 0.34842 0.35288 0.35442
H20 0.08960 0.08704 0.08091 0.07967 0.07796 0.07551 0.07214
NO 0.00019 0.00011 0.00001 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
N2 0.09910 0.09950 0.10048 0.10058 0.10063 0.10064 0.10065
0 0.00010 0.00005 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
OH 0.00262 0.00172 0.00009 0.00005 0.00002 0.00000 0.00000
PROBLEMS 193
TABLE 5---10. Typical Gas Characteristics for Fuel-rich Liquid Propellant Gas
Generators
Gas Oxidizer- Specific
Constant R to-fuel heat cP
Propellant Ti (K) k (ft-lbf/lbm-R) ratio (kcal/kg-K)
Liquid oxygen and liquid 900 1.370 421 0.919 1.99
liquid hydrogen 1050 1.357 375 1.065 1.85
1200 1.338 347 1.208 1.78
Liquid oxygen and 900 1.10 I 45.5 0.322 0.639
kerosene 1050 1.127 55.3 0.423 0.654
1200 1.148 64.0 0.516 0.662
Nitrogen tetroxide and 1050 1.420 87.8 0.126 0.386
dimethyl hydrazine 1200 1.420 99.9 0.274 0.434
PROBLEMS
1. Explain the physical or chemical reasons for a maximum value of specific impulse at
a particular mixture ratio of oxidizer to fuel.
2. Explain why, in Table 5-8, the relative proportion of monatomic hydrogen and
monatonic oxygen changes markedly with different chamber pressures and exit
pressures.
3. This chapter contains several charts for the performance of liquid oxygen and RP-I
hydrocarbon fuel. By mistake the next shipment of cryogenic oxidizer contains at
least 15% liquid nitrogen. Explain what general trends should be expected in the
results of the next test in the performance values, the composition of the exhaust gas
under chamber and nozzle conditions, and the optimum mixture ratio.
4. A mixture of perfect gases consists of 3 kg of carbon monoxide and 1.5 kg of
nitrogen at a pressure of 0.1 MPa and a temperature of 298.15 K. Using Table 5-
1, find (a) the effective molecular mass of the mixture, (b) its gas constant, (c)
specific heat ratio, (d) partial pressures, and (e) density.
Answers: (a) 28 kg/kg-mo!, (b) 297 J/kg-K, (c) 1.40, (d) 0.0666 and 0.0333 MPa, (e)
1.13 kg/m3 .
5. Using information from Table 5-2, plot the value of the specific heat ratio for
carbon monoxide (CO) as a function of temperature. Notice the trend of this
curve; it is typical of the temperature behavior of other diatomic gases.
Answers: k = 1.28 at 3500 K, 1.30 at 2000 K, 1.39 at 500 K.
6. Modify and tabulate two entries in Table 5-5 for operation in the vacuum of space,
namely oxygen/hydrogen and nitrogen tetroxide/hydrazine. Assume the data in the
table represents the design condition.
194 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
7. The figures in this chapter show several parameters and gas compositions of liquid
oxygen burning with RP-I, which is a kerosene-type material. For a mixture ratio of
2.0, use the compositions to verify the molecular mass in the chamber and the
specific impulse (frozen equilibrium flow in nozzle) in Fig. 5-1.
SYMBOLS
(Symbols referring to chemical elements, compounds, or mathematical opera
tors are not included in this list.)
number of kilogram atoms
throat area, m2
characteristic velocity, m/sec
Cp specific heat per unit mass, J/kg-K
cp molar specific heat at constant pressure of gas mixture, J/kg-mol-K
go acceleration of gravity at sea level, 9.8066m/sec2
G Gibbs free energy for a propellant combustion gas mixture, J/kg
t:i1Go change in free energy of formation at 298.15 K and I bar
G1 free energy for a particular species j, J/ kg
t:i,.H overall enthalpy change, J/kg or J/kg-mol
t:i,.Hi enthalpy change for a particular species j, J/ kg
t:i,.,Ho heat of reaction at reference 298.15 K and I bar, J/ kg
t:i,.!Ho heat of formation at reference 298.15 K and I bar, J/ kg
h enthalpy for a particular species, J/kg or J/kg-mol
Is specific impulse, N-sec3 /kg;m2 (lbf-sec/lbm)
k specific heat ratio
K1 equilibrium constant when a compound is formed from its
elements
equilibrium constant as a function of molar fractions
equilibrium constant as a function of partial pressure
number of gaseous species
mass flow rate, kg/sec
molecular mass (also called molecular weight) of gas mixture,
kg/mo!
n total number of species or moles per unit mass (kg-mo I/kg) of
mixture
n1 mole fraction or volume percent of species j, kg-mol/kg-mixture
p pressure of gas mixture, N/m2
R gas constant, J/kg-K
R' universal gas constant, 8314.31/kg mol-K
s
entropy, J/kg mol-K
T absolute temperature, K
u
internal energy, J/kg-mol
V gas velocity, m/sec
V specific volume, m3 /kg
REFERENCES 195
Greek Letters
E nozzle exit area ratio (exit/throat area)
A Lagrange multiplier, or factor for the degree of advancement of a
chemical reaction
p density, kg/m3
Subscripts
a, b molar fractions of reactant species A or B
c, d molar fractions of product species C or D
atomic species in a specific propellant
j constituents or species in reactants or products
mrx mixture of gases
ref at reference condition (also superscript 0 )
1 chamber condition
2 nozzle exit condition
3 ambient atmospheric condition
REFERENCES
5-1. F. Van Zeggeren and S. H. Storey, The Computation of Chemical Equilibria,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1970.
5-2. S. S. Penner, Thermodynamics for Scientists and Engineers, Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., Reading, MA, 1968.
5-3. S. I. Sandler, Chemical and Engineering Thermodynamics, John Wiley & Sons,
1999, 656 pages.
5-4. M. W. Zemansky and R.H. Dittman, Heat and Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill
Book Company, New York, 1981.
5-5. K. Denbigh, The Principles of Chemical Equilibrium, 4th ed., Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1981.
5-6. K. K. Kuo, Principles of Combustion, John Wiley & Sons, 1986.
5-7. JANA F Thermochemical Tables, Dow Chemical Company, Midland, Ml, Series
A (June 1963) through Series E (January 1967).
5-8. M. W. Chase, C. A. Davies, J. R. Downey, D. J. Frurip, R. A. McDonald, and
A. N. Syverud, JANAF Thermochemical Tables, 3rd ed., Part I, Journal of
Physical and Chemical Reference Data, Vol. 14, Supplement 1, American
Chemical Society, American Institute of Physics, and National Bureau of
Standards, 1985.
5-9. D. D. Wagman et al., "The NBS Tables of Chemical Thermodynamic
Properties," Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data, Vol. 11,
Supplement 2, American Chemical Society, American Institute of Physics, and
National Bureau of Standards, 1982.
196 CHEMICAL ROCKET PROPELLANT PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
5-10. J. B. Pedley, R. D. Naylor, and S. P. Kirby, Thermochemical Data of Organic
Compounds, 2nd ed., Chapman & Hall, London, 1986.
5-11. B. J. McBride, S. Gordon, and M. Reno, "Thermodynamic Data for Fifty
Reference Elements," NASA Technical Paper 3287, January 1993.
5-12. B. J. McBride and S. Gordon, "Computer Program for Calculating and Fitting
Thermodynamic Functions," NASA Reference Publication 1271, November
1992.
5-13. S. Gordon and B. J. McBride, "Computer Program for Calculation of Complex
Chemical Equilibrium Compositions and Applications, Vol. I: Analysis"
(October 1994) and "Vol. 2: User Manual and Program Description" (June
1996), NASA Reference Publication 1311.
5-14. S. Gordon and B. J. McBride, "Finite Area Combustor Theoretical Rocket
Performance," NASA TM 100785, April 1988.
CHAPTER 6
LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET
ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
This is the first of five chapters devoted to liquid propellant rocket engines. It
gives an overview of the engines (a definition of various propellants, engine
performance, propellant budget), and of the smaller reaction control engines. It
also presents several of their principal subsystems, such as two types of feed
systems (including engine cycles), propellant tanks and their pressurization
subsystems, valves and piping systems, and engine structures. Chapter 7 covers
liquid propellants in more detail, Chapter 8 deals with thrust chambers (and
nozzles), Chapter 9 with combustion, and Chapter 10 discusses turbopumps,
engine design, engine controls, propellant budgets, engine balance and calibra
tion, overall engine systems.
A liquid propellant rocket propulsion system is commonly called a rocket
engine. It has all the hardware components and propellants necessary for its
operation, that is, for producing thrust. It consists of one or more thrust
chambers, one or more tanks* to store the propellants, a feed mechanism to
force the propellants from the tanks into the thrust chamber(s), a power source
to furnish the energy for the feed mechanism, suitable plumbing or piping to
transfer the liquids, a structure* to transmit the thrust force, and control devices
to initiate and regulate the propellant flow and thus the thrust. In some appli
cations an engine may also include a thrust vector control system, various
instrumentation and residual propellant (trapped in pipes, valves, or wetting
tank walls). It does not include hardware for non-propulsive purposes, such
*The tanks and some or all of the engine structure and piping are sometimes considered to be part of
the vehicle or the test facility and not the engine, depending on the preference of the organizations
working on the project.
197
198 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
as aerodynamic surfaces, guidance, or navigation equipment, or the useful
payload, such as a scientific space exploration package or a missile warhead.
Figures 1-3 and 1-4 show the basic flow diagrams for simple rocket engines
with a pressurized and a turbopump feed system. Figure 6-1 shows a complex,
sophisticated, high-performance liquid propellant rocket engine. References
6-1 and 6-2 give general liquid propellant rocket engine information.
Additional data and figures on other rocket engines can be found in Chapter 10.
The design of any propulsion system is tailored to fit a specific application
or mission requirement. These requirements are usually stated in terms of the
application (anti-aircraft rocket, upper stage launch vehicle propulsion, or
projectile assist), mission velocity, the desired flight trajectories (surface launch,
orbit transfer, altitude-performance profile), vulnerability, attitude control tor
ques and duty cycle, minimum life (during storage or in orbit), or number of
units to be built and delivered. They include constraints on cost, schedule,
operating conditions (such as temperature limits), storage conditions, or safety
rules. Additional criteria, constraints, and the selection process are explained in
Chapter 17.
The mission requirements can be translated into rocket engine requirements in
terms of thrust-time profile, propellants, number of thrust chambers, total
impulse, number of restarts, minimum reliability, likely propellant, and engine
masses and their sizes or envelopes. We can do this only if we select several of
the key engine features, such as the feed system, chamber pressure, the method
of cooling the thrust chambers, thrust modulation (restart, throttle, thrust
vector control), engine cycle (if using turbopump feed), and other key design
features. We can arrive at one or more engine concepts and their preliminary or
conceptual designs. Tables 1-3 to 1-5 give typical data. Many different types of
rocket engines have been built and flown, ranging in thrust size from less than
0.01 !bf to over 1.75 million pounds, with one-time operation or multiple starts
(some have over 150,000 restarts), with or without thrust modulation (called
throttling), single use or reusable, arranged as single engines or in clusters of
multiple units.
One way to categorize liquid propellant rocket engines is described in Table
6-1. There are two categories, namely those used for boosting a payload and
imparting a significant velocity increase to a payload, and auxiliary propulsion
for trajectory adjustments and attitude control. Liquid propellant rocket engine
systems can be classified in several other ways. They can be reusable (like the
Space Shuttle main engine or a booster rocket engine for quick ascent or
maneuvers of fighter aircraft) or suitable for a single flight only (as the engines
in the Atlas or Titan launch vehicles) and they can be restartable, like a reac
tion control engine, or single firing, as in a space launch vehicle. They can also
be categorized by their propellants, application, or stage, such as an upper stage
or booster stage, their thrust level, and by the feed system type (pressurized or
turbopump).
The thrust chamber or thruster is the combustion device where the liquid
propellants are metered, injected, atomized, mixed, and burned to form hot
Gimbal bearing
Low-pressure fuel
turbopump duct
Low-pressure with flex. joints Low-pressure
~ oxidizer turbopump Valvefor-- ---fuel turbopump
ox1d1zer preburner '_,-i.u·w-" Hydraulic/pneumatic
-'5-rri-t--t=:c+ interfaces
Oxidizer preburner valve
--LPOTP discharge duct
with flexible Joints
Pogo accumulator
~- Nozzle exit
FIGURE 6-1. Two views of the Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME). Its flowsheet is in Figure 6-12 and some component data are in Chapter
..... 10. (Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power.)
~
200 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
TABLE 6--1. Characteristics of Two Categories of Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines
Purpose Boost Propulsion Auxiliary Propulsion
Mission Impart significant velocity to propel Attitude control, minor space
a vehicle along its flight path maneuvers, trajectory
corrections, orbit maintenance
Applications Booster stage and upper stages of Spacecraft, satellites, top stage of
launch vehicles, large missiles anti-ballistic missile, space
rendezvous
Total impulse High Low
Number of thrust Usually I; sometimes 4, 3, or 2 Between 4 and 24
chambers per
engine
Thrust level High; 4500 N up to 7,900,000 N or Small; 0.001 up to 4500 N, a few
1000-1,770,000 ]bf go up to I 000 !bf
Feed system Mostly turbopump type; occasionally Pressurized feed system with high-
pressurized feed system for smaller pressure gas supply
thrusts
Propellants Cryogenic and storable liquids Storable liquids, monopropellants,
(see next section) and/or stored cold gas
Chamber pressure 2.4-21 MPa or 350-3600 psi 0.14-2.1 MPa or 20-300 psi
Number of starts Usually no restart; sometimes one, Several thousand starts are typical
during a single but up to four in some cases for small thrusters; fewer for
mission larger thrust chambers, perhaps
up to IO starts
Cumulative Up to a few minutes Up to several hours
duration of
firing
Shortest firing Typically 5-40 sec 0.02 sec typical for small thrusters
duration
Time elapsed to Up to several seconds Usually very fast, 0.004-0.080 sec
reach full thrust
Life in space Hours, days, or months 10 years or more in space
gaseous reaction products, which in turn are accelerated and ejected at a high
velocity to impart a thrust force. A thrust chamber has three major parts: an
injector, a combustion chamber, and a nozzle. In a cooled thrust chamber, one of
the propellants (usually the fuel) is circulated through cooling jackets or a
special cooling passage to absorb the heat that is transferred from the hot
reaction gases to the thrust chamber walls (see Figs 8-2 and 8-3). A radia
tion-cooled thrust chamber uses a special high-temperature material, such as
niobium metal, which can radiate away its excess heat. There are uncooled or
heat-absorbing thrust chambers, such as those using ablative materials. Thrust
chambers are discussed in Chapter 8.
There are two types of feed systems used for liquid propellant rocket
engines: those that use pumps for moving the propellants from their flight
6.1. PROPELLANTS 201
vehicle tanks to the thrust chamber, and those that use high-pressure gas for
expelling or displacing their propellants from their tanks. They are discussed
further in Chapter IO and in Section 6.2 of this chapter.
Tables 17~1 to 17--4 compare the advantages and disadvantages of liquid
propellant rocket engines and solid propellant rocket motors.
6.1. PROPELLANTS
The propellants, which are the working substance of rocket engines, constitute
the fluid that undergoes chemical and thermodynamic changes. The term liquid
propellant embraces all the various liquids used and may be one of the
following:
I. Oxidizer (liquid oxygen, nitric acid, etc.)
2. Fuel (gasoline, alcohol, liquid hydrogen, etc.).
3. Chemical compound or mixture of oxidizer and fuel ingredients, capable
of self-decomposition.
4. Any of the above, but with a gelling agent.
All are described in Chapter 7.
A bipropellant rocket unit has two separate liquid propellants, an oxidizer
and a fuel. They are stored separately and are not mixed outside the combus
tion chamber. The majority of liquid propellant rockets have been manufac
tured for bipropellant applications.
A monopropellant contains an oxidizing agent and combustible matter in a
single substance. It may be a mixture of several compounds or it may be a
homogeneous material, such as hydrogen peroxide or hydrazine.
Monopropellants are stable at ordinary atmospheric conditions but decompose
and yield hot combustion gases when heated or catalyzed.
A cold gas propellant (e.g., nitrogen) is stored at very high pressure, gives a
low performance, allows a simple system and is usually very reliable. It has
been used for roll control and attitude control.
A cryogenic propellant is liquified gas at low temperature, such as liquid
oxygen (-l 83°C) or liquid hydrogen (-253°C). Provisions for venting the
storage tank and minimizing vaporization losses are necessary with this type.
Storable propellants (e.g., nitric acid or gasoline) are liquid at ambient tem
perature and can be stored for long periods in sealed tanks. Space storable
propellants are liquid in the environment of space; this storability depends on
the specific tank design, thermal conditions, and tank pressure. An example is
ammonia.
A gelled propellant is a thixotropic liquid with a gelling additive. It behaves
like a jelly or thick paint. It will not spill or leak readily, can flow under
pressure, will burn, and is safer in some respects. It is described in a separate
section of Chapter 7.
202 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
The propellant mixture ratio for a bipropellant is the ratio at which the
oxidizer and fuel are mixed and react to give hot gases. The mixture ratio r
m
is defined as the ratio of the oxidizer mass flow rate and the fuel mass flow
0
rate mf or
(6-1)
The mixture ratio defines the composition of the reaction products. It is usually
chosen to give a maximum value of specific impulse or T /911, where T is the
1 1
combustion temperature and 9J1 is the average molecular mass of the reaction
gases (see Eq. 3-16 or Fig. 3-2). For a given thrust F and a given effective
exhaust velocity c, the total propellant flow is given by Eq. 2-6; namely,
ri1 = wI g o = FI C. The relationships between r' m, mo, and mf are
mo+ rry = m (6-2)
lrlo = rm/(r + 1) (6-3)
mr = m/(r + 1) (6-4)
w
These same four equations are valid when w and (weight) are substituted for
m.
m and Calculated performance values for a number of different propellant
combinations are given for specific mixture ratios in Table 5-5. Physical prop
erties and a discussion of several common liquid propellants and their safety
concerns are described in Chapter 7.
Example 6-1. A liquid oxygen-liquid hydrogen rocket thrust chamber of 10,000-lbf
thrust operates at a chamber pressure of 1000 psia, a mixture ratio of 3.40, has exhaust
products with a mean molecular mass of 8.9 lbm/lb-mol, a combustion temperature of
4380°F, and a specific heat ratio of 1.26. Determine the nozzle area, exit area for
optimum operation at an altitude where p = p = 1.58 psia, the propellant weight
3 2
and volume flow rates, and the total propellant requirements for 2 min of operation.
Assume that the actual specific impulse is 97% of the theoretical value.
SOLUTION. The exhaust velocity for an optimum nozzle is determined from Eq. 3-16,
but with a correction factor of g for the foot-pound system.
0
[l _
2gok R'T1 (JJ_2)<k-ll/k]
k - 1 fill \p
1
2 x 32.2: 1.26 1544 x 4840 ( 1 - 0.001580 20s) = 13,900 ft/ sec
0.2 8.9
The theoretical specific impulse is c/g 0, or in this case v 2/g 0 or 13,900/32.2 = 431 sec.
The actual specific impulse is 0.97 x 431 = 418 sec. The theoretical or ideal thrust
coefficient can be found from Eq. 3-30 or from Fig. 3-6 (p 2 = p 3) to be CF= 1.76.
The actual thrust coefficient is slightly less, say 98% or CF= 1.72. The throat area
required is found from Eq. 3-31.
6.2. PROPELLANT FEED SYSTEMS 203
A 1 = F/(CFp 1) = 10,000/(1.72 x 1000) = 5.80 in.2 (2.71 in. diameter)
The optimum area ratio can be found from Eq. 3-25 or Fig. 3-5 to be 42. The exit area
is 5.80 x 42 = 244 in.2 (17.6 in. diameter). The weight density of oxygen is 71.1 lbf/ft3
and of hydrogen is 4.4 lbf/ft3 . The propellant weight flow rate is (Equation 2-5)
iv= F/ / = 10,000/418 = 24.0 !bf/ sec
5
The oxygen and fuel weight flow rates are, from Eqs. 6--3 and 6--4,
w = wr/(r + I)= 24.0 x 3.40/4.40 = 18.55 !bf/ sec
0
ivr = w/(r + I)= 24/4.40 = 5.45 !bf/ sec
The volume flow rates are determined from the densities and the weight flow rates.
V. = w. /p = 18.55/71.1 = 0.261 ft 3 /sec
0 0 0
. 3
Vr=w1/Pr=5.45/4.4= 1.24ft /sec
For 120 sec of operations (arbitrarily allow the equivalent of two additional seconds for
start and stop transients and unavailable propellant), the weight and volume of required
propellant are
w = 18.55 x 122 = 2260 !bf of oxygen
0
w = 5.45 x 122 = 665 !bf of hydrogen
1
V = 0.261 x 122 = 31.8 ft3 of oxygen
0
v 1 = 1.24 x 122 = 151 ft3 of hydrogen
Note that, with the low-density fuel, the volume flow rate and therefore the tank volume
of hydrogen are large compared to that of the oxidizer.
6.2. PROPELLANT FEED SYSTEMS
The propellant feed system has two principal functions: to raise the pressure of
the propellants and to feed them to one or more thrust chambers. The energy
for these functions comes either from a high-pressure gas, centrifugal pumps,
or a combination of the two. The selection of a particular feed system and its
components is governed primarily by the application of the rocket, the require
ments mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, duration, number or type of
thrust chambers, past experience, mission, and by general requirements of
simplicity of design, ease of manufacture, low cost, and minimum inert mass.
A classification of several of the more important types of feed system is shown
in Fig. 6-2 and some are discussed in more detail below. All feed systems have
piping, a series of valves, provisions for filling and removing (draining and
flushing) the liquid propellants, and control devices to initiate, stop, and reg
ulate their flow and operation.
I
Liquid propellant
feed systems
I I
Pressurized systems Turbopump systems
I I I I I I I
Direct gas Flexible bag I I Piston Pump I I Turbine I Gas power supply'
pressurization within tank pressurization and gas discharge
I
I
I I I I
I Multi-stage Single stage I
I B iny e s rI tt o gr ae sd 11 By p rv oa pp eI o llr aiz ne t d I gB ey n c eh raeI t m edic a gl aly s I ~i mpe Il lers I I impeller I I P re cc ho am mb bu es rt ion I I Se gp ea nr ea rt ae t og ra s I
I I I I
I I Small portion of one One pump Two main Warm Hot gas bleed
As received I Heated I propellant flow raised to each for fuel pumps plus two hydrogen from main
J J precombustor pressure and oxidizer booster pumps from cooling combustion
I I with additional impeller jacket chamber
I
I I I
I Regulated I Blow down I I
pressure Hot gas Driven by high pressure I I
I I
turbine liquid propellant (for Flow through Flow through
booster pumps only) turbines in turbines in
series parallel
Single stage j j Two stage
I I
I I I I I I
One turbine drives Two turbines; one Four turbines; two Exhaust overboard Exhaust feeds Exhaust into
both fuel and for fuel pump, one for main pumps, two with low area into diverging injector of
oxidizer pumps for oxidizer pump for booster pumps ratio nozzle nozzle section main combustor
I I I I
I
With gear I Direct drive j
I
transmission I
FIGURE 6-2. Design options offed systems for liquid propellant rocket engines. The more common types are designated with a double line at
the bottom of the box.
6.3. GAS PRESSURE FEED SYSTEMS 205
In general, a pressure feed system gives a vehicle performance superior to a
turbopump system when the total impulse or the mass of propellant is rela
tively low, the chamber pressure is low, the engine thrust-to-weight ratio is low
(usually less than 0.6), and when there are repeated short-duration thrust
pulses; the heavy-walled tanks for the propellant and the pressurizing gas
usually constitute the major inert mass of the engine system. In a turbopump
feed systems the propellant tank pressures are much lower (by a factor of 10 to
40) and thus the tank masses are much lower (again by a factor of 10 to 40).
Turbopump systems usually give a superior vehicle performance when the total
impulse is large (higher ~u) and the chamber pressure is higher.
The pressurized feed system can be relatively simple, such as for a single
operation, factory-preloaded, simple unit (with burst diaphragms instead of
some of the valves), or quite complex, as with multiple restartable thrusters or
reusable systems. Table 6--2 shows typical features that have been designed into
pressurized feed systems in order to satisfy particular design goals. Figures 1-3,
6-3, 6-4, and 6-13 show some of these features. If the propulsion system is to
be reusable or is part of a manned vehicle (where the reliability requirements
are very high and the vehicle's crew can monitor and override automatic com
mands), the feed system becomes more complex (with more safety features and
redundancies) and more expensive.
The pneumatic (pressurizing gas) and hydraulic (propellant) flows in a liquid
propellant engine can be simulated in a computer analysis that provides for a
flow and pressure balance in the oxidizer and the fuel flow paths through the
system. One approach is shown in Ref. 6--3. Some of these analyses can provide
information on transient conditions (filling up of passages) during start, flow
decays at cutoff, possible water hammer, or flow instabilities. The details of
such analyses are not described in this book, but the basic mathematical simu
lation is relatively straightforward.
6.3. GAS PRESSURE FEED SYSTEMS
One of the simplest and most common means of pressurizing the propellants is
to force them out of their respective tanks by displacing them with high-pres
sure gas. This gas is fed into the propellant tanks at a controlled pressure,
thereby giving a controlled propellant discharge. Because of their relative sim
plicity, the rocket engines with pressurized feed systems can be very reliable.
Reference 6-3 includes a design guide for pressurized gas systems.
A simple pressurized feed system is shown schematically in Fig. 1-3. It
consists of a high-pressure gas tank, a gas starting valve, a pressure regulator,
propellant tanks, propellant valves, and feed lines. Additional components,
such as filling and draining provisions, check valves, filters, flexible elastic
bladders for separating the liquid from the pressurizing gas, and pressure
sensors or gauges, are also often incorporated. After all tanks are filled, the
high-pressure gas valve in Fig. 1-3 is remotely actuated and admits gas through
206 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
TABLE 6-2. Typical Features of Liquid Propellant Feed Systems
Enhance Safety
Sniff devices to detect leak of hazardous vapor; used on Space Shuttle orbiter
Check valves to prevent backflow of propellant into the gas tank and inadvertent mixing of
propllants inside flow passages
Features that prevent an unsafe condition to occur or persist and shut down engine safely, such
as relief valves or relief burst diaphragms to prevent tank overpressurization), or a vibration
monitor to shut off operation in the case of combustion instability
Isolation valves to shut off a section of a system that has a leak or malfunction
Burst diaphragms or isolation valves to isolate the propellants in their tanks and positively
prevent leakage into the thrust chamber or into the other propellant tank during storage
Inert pressurizing gas
Provide Control
Valves to control pressurization and flow to the thrust chambers (start/stop/throttle)
Sensors to measure temperatures, pressures, valve positions, thrust, etc., and computers to
monitor/analyze system status, issue command signals, and correct if sensed condition is
outside predetermined limits
Manned vehicle can require system status display and command signal override
Fault detection, identification, and automatic remedy, such as shut-off isolation valves in
compartment in case of fire, leak, or disabled thruster
Control thrust (throttle valve) to fit a desired thrust-time profile
Enhance Reliability
Fewest practical number of components/subassemblies
Ability to provide emergency mode engine operation, such as return of Space Shuttle vehicle to
landing
Filters to catch dirt in propellant lines, which could prevent valve from closing or small injector
holes from being plugged up or bearings from galling.
Duplication of unreliable key components, such as redundant small thrusters, regulators, check
valves, or isolation valves
Heaters to prevent freezing of moisture or low-melting-point propellant
Long storage life-use propellants with little or no chemical deterioration and no reaction with
wall materials
Provide for Reusability
Provisions to drain remaining propellants or pressurants
Provision for cleaning, purging, flushing, and drying the feed system and refilling propellants
and pressurizing gas in field
Devices to check functioning of key components prior to next operation
Features to allow checking of engine calibration and leak testing after operation
Features for access of inspection devices for visual inspection at internal surfaces or components
Enable Effective Propellant Utilization
High tank expulsion efficiency with minimum residual, unavailable propellant
Lowest possible ambient temperature variation or matched propellant property variation with
temperature so as to minimize mixture ratio change and residual propellant
Alternatively, measure remaining propellant in tanks (using a special gauge) and automatically
adjust mixture ratio (throttling) to minimize residual propellant
Minimize pockets in the piping and valves that cannot be readily drained
6.3. GAS PRESSURE FEED SYSTEMS 207
the pressure regulator at a constant pressure to the propellant tanks. The check
valves prevent mixing of the oxidizer with the fuel when the unit is not in an
upright position. The propellants are fed to the thrust chamber by opening
valves. When the propellants are completely consumed, the pressurizing gas
can also scavenge and clean lines and valves of much of the liquid propellant
residue. The variations in this system, such as the combination of several valves
into one or the elimination and addition of certain components, depend to a
large extent on the application. If a unit is to be used over and over, such as
space-maneuver rocket, it will include several additional features such as, pos
sibly, a thrust-regulating device and a tank level gauge; they will not be found
in an expendable, single-shot unit, which may not even have a tank-drainage
provision. Different bipropellant pressurization concepts are evaluated in Refs.
6-3, 6--4, and 6-5. Table 6-2 lists various optional features. Many of these
features also apply to pump-fed systems, which are discussed in Section 6 .. 6.
With monopropellants the gas pressure feed system becomes simpler, since
there is only one propellant and not two, reducing the number of pipes, valves,
and tanks.
A complex man-rated pressurized feed system, the combined Space Shuttle
Orbital Maneuver System (OMS) and the Reaction Control System (RCS), is
described in Figs 6-3 and 6--4, Ref. 6-6, and Table 6-3. There are three loca
tions for the RCS, as shown in Fig. 1-13: a forward pod and a right and left aft
pod. Figures 6-3 and 6--4 refer to one of the aft pods only and show a com
bined OMS and RCS arrangement. The OMS provides thrust for orbit inser
tion, orbit circularization, orbit transfer, rendezvous, deorbit, and abort. The
RCS provides thrust for attitude control (in pitch, yaw, and roll) and for small
vehicle velocity corrections or changes in almost any direction (translation
maneuvers), such as are needed for rendezvous and docking; it can operate
simultaneously with or separate from the OMS.
The systems feature various redundancies, an automatic RCS thruster selec
tion system, various safety devices, automatic controls, sensors to allow a
display to the Shuttle's crew of the system's status and health, and manual
command overrides. The reliability requirements are severe. Several key com
ponents, such as all the helium pressure regulators, propellant tanks, some
valves, and about half the thrusters are duplicated and redundant; if one
fails, another can still complete the mission. It is possible to feed up to 1000
lbm of the liquid from the large OMS propellant tanks to the small RCS ones,
in case it is necessary to run one or more of the small reaction control thrusters
for a longer period and use more propellant than the smaller tanks allow; it is
also possible to feed propellant from the left aft system to the one on the
vehicle's right side, and vice versa. These features allow for more than nominal
total impulse in a portion of the thrusters, in case it is needed for a particular
mission mode or an emergency mode.
The compartmented steel propellant tanks with antislosh and antivortex
baffles, sumps, and a surface tension propellant retention device allow propel
lant to be delivered independent of the propellant load, the orientation, or the
208 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
RCS helium RCS propellant Gimballed
tanks manifold valves OMS engine
(1 per aft pod)
I
RCS
pressurization OMS helium tank
components oxidizer tank
FIGURE 6-3. Simplified sketch at the left aft pod of the Space Shuttle's Orbiting
Maneuvering System (OMS) and the Reaction Control System (RCS). (Source: NASA.)
acceleration environment (some of the time in zero-g). Gauges in each tank
allow a determination of the amount of propellant remaining, and they also
indicate a leak. Safety features include sniff lines at each propellant valve
actuator to sense leakage. Electrical heaters are provided at propellant valves,
certain lines, and injectors to prevent fuel freezing or moisture forming into ice.
A typical RCS feature that enhances safety and reliability is a self-shutoff
device is small thrusters that will cause a shutdown in case they should experi
ence instability and burn through the walls. Electrical lead wires to the pro
pellant valves are wrapped around the chamber and nozzle; a burnout will
quickly melt the wire and cut the power to the valve, which will return to
the spring-loaded closed position and shut off the propellant flow.
The majority of pressurized feed systems use a pressure regulator to main
tain the propellant tank pressure and thus also the thrust at constant values.
The required mass of pressurizing gas can be significantly reduced by a blow
down system with a "tail-off' pressure decay. The propellants are expelled by
the expansion of the gas already in the enlarged propellant tanks. The tank
pressure and the chamber pressure decrease or progressively decay during this
adiabatic expansion period. The alternatives of either regulating the inert gas
pressure or using a blowdown system are compared in Table 6--4; both types
RCS helium tanks (2) OMS helium tank
r9., r9.,/ Q
~~j~~:n
r-·~-,
6 6 6 6 valve (6) 6 .1,/Dual helium pressure regulators (6 sets)
r·¢ Q-~ r<i 9--: ,-¢ l,1"~
r-¢ CH i-,¢ cH i: Q- -QE i -oS~et of ·4 s"enes -"pa"ra"lle'!
L.. ~ i. . J L.. J tJ
O
Pressure r ve al li ve ef [E F: il} l/- ve- nO tf ·· ·- ·.- ~.~ ·' Fill/ve1 n- t• - -- "~ ~' ~~-.r '". 1:: ...: .:.p .lJ [E]- t- -0 -·- -•! , lr
--
-· -O --1·
'
- E:i] Relief valve (4 places)
Fill/vent Fill/vent
MMH ta- nR k CSO MMH
:(r-, OMS N204 OMS tank
tank
,---------l--1-- ! 1--------. Dual propeilant tank
isolation valves (4 sets)
I ' ,..L I r·i
·------'~ t J I II I .. T ..
1 I y I
Vernier I I ,---' I Cross feeds to nght
supply line ---<r I I I I r~, s1de pod, each with
vais lvo ela st i (o 2n ) j II 1--I t I - ~-1 - --1 ---J- -- --------I' dua! isolation valves
----o-, I L-<>-1
I
I __ 7.. ---1
I }Dualfuel/oxid12er
I OMS-RCS F ,---~ thrust chamber valves
II
c ir so os ls
a
tf ie oe nd fu ie
l
1
l
~I Ir
valve (4) 1
t l ....J
Fuel OMS thrust chamber (gimballed)
cooling
jacket
Two vernier 12 Primary RCS thrusters-each with
thrusters, 2 isolation valves, arranged with 4
each with two sets of feed lines, each with isolation valves
propellant
isolation
va!ves
II,) FIGURE 6-4. Simplified flow diagram of the propellant feed system flow for the left aft pod of the Orbital
0
<O Maneuvering System (OMS) and Reaction Control System (RCS) of the Space Shuttle Orbiter Vehicle. Solid lines:
nitrogen tetroxide (N 20 4); dash-dot lines: monomethylhydrazine (MMH); short dashed lines: high-pressure helium.
(Source: NASA.)
210 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
TABLE 6-3. Characteristics of the Orbital Maneuver System (OMS) and the
Reaction Control System (RCS) of the Space Shuttle in One of the Aft Side Podes
Item OMS Primary RCS Vernier RCS
Thrust (per nozzle) (!bf) 6000 870 25
Number of thrusters per pod I 12 2
Thrust chamber cooling Regenerative Radiation cooling
and radiation
Chamber pressure, nominal (psi) 125 152 110
Specific impulse (vacuum nominal) (sec) 313 280" 265a
Nozzle area ratio 55 22-30" 20-50a
Mixture ratio (oxide/fuel mass flow) 1.65 1.6 1.6
Burn time, minimum (sec) 2 0.08 0.08
Burn time, maximum (sec) 160 150 125
Burn time, cumulative (sec) 54,000 12,800 125,000
Number of starts, cumulative (sec) 1000 20,000 330,000
Oxidizer (N 20 4) weight in tank (lb) 14,866 1464
Fuel (MMH) weight in tank (lb) 9010 923
Number of oxidizer/fuel tanks I/ I I/ I
Propellant tank volume, each tank (ft3 ) 90 17.9
Ullage volume, nominal (full tank) (ft3 ) 7.8 1.2-1.5
Tank pressure, nominal (psi) 250 280
Helium storage tank pressure (psi) 4700 3600
Number of helium tanks 2
Volume of helium tanks (ft3 ) 17 1.76
0Depends on specific vehicle location and scarfing of nozzle.
Sources: NASA, Aerojet Propulsion Company and Kaiser Marquardt Company.
are currently being used. The selection depends on specific application require
ments, cost, inert mass, reliability, and safety considerations (see Refs. 6--4 and
6-5).
Some pressure feed systems can be prefilled with propellant and pressurizing
agent at the factory and stored in readiness for operation. Compared to a solid
propellant rocket unit, these storable prepackaged liquid propellant pressur
ized feed systems offer advantages in long-term storability and resistance to
transportation vibration or shock.
The thrust level of a rocket propulsion system with a pressurized gas feed
system is determined by the magnitude of the propellant flow which, in turn, is
determined by the gas pressure regulator setting. The propellant mixture ratio
in this type of feed system is controlled by the hydraulic resistance of the liquid
propellant lines, cooling jacket, and injector, and can usually be adjusted by
means of variable or interchangeable restrictors. Further discussion of the
adjusting of thrust and mixture ratio can be found in Section 10.6 and in
Example 10-3.
6.4. PROPELLANT TANKS 211
TABLE 6-4. Comparison of Two Types of Gas Pressurization Systems
Type Regulated Pressure Blowdown
Pressure/thrust Stays essentially constant Decreases as propellant is consumed
Gas storage In separate high-pressure tanks Gas is stored inside propellant tank with
large ullage volume (30 to 60%)
Required Needs regulator, filter, gas valve, Larger, heavier propellant tanks
components and gas tank
Advantages Constant-pressure feed gives Simpler system
essentially constant propellant Less gas required
flow and approximately Can be less inert mass
constant thrust, constant I,
and r
Better control of mixture
ratio
Disadvantages Slightly more complex Thrust decreases with burn duration
Regulator introduces a small Somewhat higher residue propellant due
pressure drop to less accurate mixture ratio control
Gas stored under high pressure Thruster must operate and be stable over
Shorter burning time wide range of thrust values and modest
range of mixture ratio
Propellants stored under pressure; slightly
lower I, toward end of burning time
6.4. PROPELLANT TANKS
In liquid bipropellant rocket engine systems propellants are stored in one or
more oxidizer tanks and one or more fuel tanks; monopropellant rocket engine
systems have, of course, only one set of propellant tanks. There are also one or
more high-pressure gas tanks, the gas being used to pressurize the propellant
tanks. Tanks can be arranged in a variety of ways, and the tank design can be
used to exercise some control over the change in the location of the vehicle's
center of gravity. Typical arrangements are shown in Fig. 6-5. Because the
propellant tank has to fly, its mass is at a premium and the tank material is
therefore highly stressed. Common tank materials are aluminum, stainless
steel, titanium, alloy steel, and fiber-reinforced plastics with an impervious
thin inner liner of metal to prevent leakage through the pores of the fiber
reinforced walls.
The extra volume of gas above the propellant in sealed tanks is called ullage.
It is necessary space that allows for thermal expansion of the propellant liquids,
for the accumulation of gases that were originally dissolved in the propellant,
or for gaseous products from slow reactions within the propellant during
storage. Depending on the storage temperature range, the propellants' coeffi
cient of thermal expansion, and the particular application, the ullage volume is
usually between 3 and 10% of the tank volume. Once propellant is loaded into
212 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
3 Oxidizer
tanks
6 Fuel
,, ,, ,, ,, tanks
"'
I I / \ I I
I I I I I I I I / I I I I \ I I I I I I I I
II I I I I /I I \ II I I I I
I I I I
I I : I I I
Spherical tanks Tandem tanks, Tandem tanks Concentric tanks Multi-tank
external piping with common
bulkhead,
internal piping
FIGURE 6-5. Typical tank arrangements for large turbopump-fed liquid propellant
rocket engines.
a tank, the ullage volume (and, if it is sealed, also its pressure) will change as
the bulk temperature of the propellant varies.
The expulsion efficiency of a tank and/or propellant piping system is the
amount of propellant expelled or available divided by the total amount of
propellant initially present. Typical values are 97 to 99.7%. The losses are
unavailable propellants that are trapped in grooves or corners of pipes, fittings,
and valves, are wetting the walls, retained by surface tension, or caught in
instrument taps. This residual propellant is not available for combustion and
must be treated as inert mass, causing the vehicle mass ratio to decrease
slightly. In the design of tanks and piping systems, an effort is made to mini
mize the residual propellant.
The optimum shape of a propellant tank (and also a gas pressurizing tank) is
spherical, because for a given volume it results in a tank with the least weight.
Small spherical tanks are often used with reaction control engine systems,
where they can be packaged with other vehicle equipment. Unfortunately,
the larger spheres, which are needed for the principal propulsion systems,
6.4. PROPELLANT TANKS 213
are not very efficient for using the space in a vehicle. These larger tanks are
often made integral with the vehicle fuselage or wing. Most are cylindrical with
half ellipses at the ends, but they can be irregular in shape. A more detailed
discussion of tank pressurization is given in the next section.
Cryogenic propellants cool the tank wall temperature far below the ambient
air temperature. This causes condensation of moisture on the outside of the
tank and usually also formation of ice during the period prior to launch. The
ice is undesirable, because it increases the vehicle inert mass and can cause
valves to malfunction. Also, as pieces of ice are shaken off or break off during
the initial flight, these pieces can damage the vehicle; for example, the ice from
the Shuttle's cryogenic tank can hit the orbiter vehicle.
For an extended storage period, cryogenic tanks are usually thermally insu
lated; porous external insulation layers have to be sealed to prevent moisture
from being condensed inside the insulation layer. With liquid hydrogen it is
possible to liquify or solidify the ambient air on the outside of the fuel tank.
Even with heavy insulation and low-conductivity structural tank supports, it is
not possible to prevent the continuous evaporation of the cryogenic fluid. Even
with good thermal insulation, all cryogenic propellants evaporate slowly dur
ing storage and therefore cannot be kept in a vehicle for more than perhaps a
week without refilling of the tanks. For vehicles that need to be stored or to
operate for longer periods, a storable propellant combination must be used.
Prior to loading very cold cryogenic propellant into a flight tank, it is
necessary to remove or evacuate the air to avoid forming solid air particles
or condensing any moisture as ice. These frozen particles would plug up injec
tion holes, cause valves to freeze shut, or prevent valves from being fully closed.
Tanks, piping, and valves need to be chilled or cooled down before they can
contain cryogenic liquid without excessive bubbling. This is usually done by
letting the initial amount of cryogenic liquid absorb the heat from the relatively
warm hardware. This initial propellant is vaporized and vented through appro
priate vent valves.
If the tank or any segment of piping containing low-temperature cryogenic
liquid is sealed for an extended period of time, heat from ambient-temperature
hardware will result in evaporation and this will greatly raise the pressure until
it exceeds the strength of the container (see Ref. 6-7). This self-pressurization
will cause a failure, usually a major leak or even an explosion. All cryogenic
tanks and piping systems are therefore vented during storage on the launch
pad, equipped with pressure safety devices (such as burst diaphragms or relief
valves), and the evaporated propellant is allowed to escape from its container.
For long-term storage of cryogenic propellants in space vacuum (or on the
ground) some form of a powered refrigeration system is needed to recondense
the vapors and minimize evaporation losses. The tanks are refilled or topped
off just before launch to replace the evaporated vented propellant. When the
tank is pressurized, just before launch, the boiling point is usually raised
slightly and the cryogenic liquid can usually absorb the heat transferred to it
during the several minutes of rocket firing.
214 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
There are several categories of tanks in liquid propellant propulsion systems:
l. For pressurized feed systems the propellant tanks typically operate at an
average pressure between 1.3 and 9 MPa or about 200 to 1800 lbf/in.2 •
These tanks have thick walls and are heavy.
2. For high-pressure gas (used to expel the propellants) the tank pressures
are much higher, typically between 6.9 and 69 MPa or 1000 to 10,000 !bf/
in.2 • These tanks are usually spherical for minimum inert mass. Several
small spherical tanks can be connected together and then they are rela
tively easy to place within the confined space of a vehicle.
3. For turbopump feed systems it is necessary to pressurize the propellant
tanks slightly (to suppress pump cavitation as explained in Section 10.l)
to average values of between 0.07 and 0.34 MPa or l Oto 50 lbf/in2 . These
low pressures allow thin tank walls, and therefore turbopump feed sys
tems have relatively low tank weights.
Liquid propellant tanks can be difficult to empty under side accelerations, zero
g, or negative-g conditions during flight. Special devices and special types of
tanks are needed to operate under these conditions. Some of the effects that
have to be overcome are described below.
The oscillations and side accelerations of vehicles in flight can cause sloshing
of the liquid in the tank, very similar to a glass of water that is being jiggled. In
an antiaircraft missile, for example, the side accelerations can be large and can
initiate sloshing. Typical analysis of sloshing can be found in Refs. 6-8 and
6-9. When the tank is partly empty, sloshing can uncover the tank outlet and
allow gas bubbles to enter into the propellant discharge line. These bubbles can
cause major combustion problems in the thrust chambers; the aspirating of
bubbles or the uncovering of tank outlets by liquids therefore needs to be
avoided. Sloshing also causes shifts in the vehicle's center of gravity and
makes flight control difficult.
Vortexing can also allow gas to enter the tank outlet pipe; this phenomenon
is similar to the Coriolis force effects in bath tubs being emptied and can be
augmented if the vehicle spins or rotates in fight. Typically, a series of internal
baffles is often used to reduce the magnitude of sloshing and vortexing in tanks
with modest side accelerations. A positive expulsion mechanism can prevent
gas from entering the propellant piping under multidirectional major accelera
tions or spinning (centrifugal) acceleration. Both the vortexing and sloshing
can greatly increase the unavailable or residual propellant, and thus cause a
reduction in vehicle performance.
In the gravity-free environment of space, the stored liquid will float around
in a partly emptied tank and may not always cover the tank outlet, thus
allowing gas to enter the tank outlet or discharge pipe. Figure 6-6 shows
that gas bubbles have no orientation. Various devices have been developed
to solve this problem: namely, positive expulsion devices and surface tension
devices. The positive expulsion tank design include movable pistons, inflatable
6.4. PROPELLANT TANKS 215
Gas in
/
/
Screen-type surface
tension propellant
management device
showing one particular
liquid distribution during
upward acceleration
Typical liquid gas
interface shapes for
wetting liquids in
zero-g conditions with
different ullage
volumes
FIGURE 6-6. Ullage bubbles can float around in a zero-gravity environment; surface
tension device can keep tank outlet covered with liquid.
flexible bladders, or thin movable, flexible metal diaphragms. Surface tension
devices rely on surface tension forces to keep the outlet covered with liquid.
Several basic types of positive expulsion devices have been used successfully
in propellant tanks of pressurized feed systems. They are compared in Table
6-5 and shown in Fig. 6-7 for simple tanks. These devices mechanically separate
the pressurizing gas from the liquid propellant in the propellant tank.
Separation is needed for these reasons:
I. It prevents pressurizing gas from dissolving in the propellant. Dissolved
pressurizing gas dilutes the propellant, reduces its density as well as its
specific impulse, and makes the pressurization inefficient.
2. It allows hot and reactive gases (generated by gas generators) to be used
for pressurization, and this permits a reduction in pressurizing system
mass and volume. The mechanical separation prevents a chemical reac
tion between the hot gas and the propellant, prevents gas from being
dissolved in the propellant, and reduces the heat transfer to the liquid.
3. In some cases tanks containing toxic propellant must be vented without
spilling any toxic liquid propellant or its vapor. For example, in servicing
N
;;; TABLE ~5. Comparison of Propellant Expulsion Methods for Spacecraft Hydrazine Tanks
Positive Expulsion Devices
Single Inflatable Dual Foldable
Elastomeric Elastomeric Metallic Surface
Diaphragm Bladder Diaphragm Piston or Rolling Tension
Selection Criteria (Hemispherical) (Spherical) (Hemispherical) Bellows Diaphragm Screens
Application history Extensive Extensive Limited Extensive in high Limited Extensive
acceleration
vehicles
Weight (normalized) 1.0 I. I l.25 l.2 1.0 0.9
Expulsion efficiency Excellent Good Good Excellent Very good Good or fair
Maximum side Low Low Medium High Medium Lowest
acceleration
Control of center of Poor Limited Good Excellent Good Poor
gravity
Long service life Excellent Excellent Excellent Very good Unproven Excellent
Preflight check Leak test Leak test Leak test Leak test Leak test None
Disadvantages Chemical Chemical High-pressure drop; Potential seal failure; Weld inspection is Limited to low
deterioration deterioration; fits fits only certain critical tolerances difficult; adhesive accelerations
only into a few tank geometries; on piston seal; (for bonding to
tank geometries high weight heavy wall) can
deteriorate)
6.4. PROPELLANT TANKS 217
Pressurizing gas
t
Elastomeric
flexible
double
bladder
--~~~
Propellant
outlet
-
(a) (b)
Sliding piston with seals
Pressurizing
gasinlet
pipe __ Propellant
-outlet pipe
Cylindrical tank
(c)
FIGURE 6-7. Three concepts of propellant tanks with positive expulsion: (a) inflatable
dual bladder; (b) rolling, peeling diaphragm; (c) sliding piston. As the propellant volume
expands or contracts with changes in ambient temperature, the piston or diaphragm will
also move slightly and the ullage volume will change during storage.
a reusable rocket, the tank pressure needs to be relieved without venting
or spilling potentially hazardous material.
A piston expulsion device permits the center of gravity (CG) to be accurately
controlled and its location to be known. This is important in rockets with high
side accelerations such as antiaircraft missiles or space defense missiles, where
the thrust vector needs to go through the CG; if the CG is not well known,
unpredictable turning moments may be imposed on the vehicle. A piston also
prevents sloshing or vortexing.
Surface tension devices use capillary attraction for supplying liquid propel
lant to the tank outlet pipe. These devices (see Fig. 6-6) are often made of very
fine (300 mesh) stainless steel wire woven into a screen and formed into tunnels
or other shapes (see Refs. 6-10 and 6-11). These screens are located near the
tank outlet and, in some tanks, the tubular galleries are designed to connect
various parts of the tank volume to the outlet pipe sump. These devices work
best in a relatively low-acceleration environment, when surface tension forces
can overcome the inertia forces.
218 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
The combination of surface tension screens, baffles, sumps, and traps is
called a propellant management device. Although not shown in any detail,
they are included inside the propellant tanks of Figs. 6-6 and 6-13.
High forces can be imposed on the tanks and thus on the vehicle by strong
sloshing motions of the liquid and also by sudden changes in position of liquid
mass in a partly empty tank during a gravity-free flight when suddenly accel
erated by a relatively large thrust. These forces can be large and can cause tank
failure. The forces will depend on the tank geometry, baffles, ullage volume,
and its initial location and the acceleration magnitude and direction.
6.5. TANK PRESSURIZATION
Subsystems for pressurizing tanks are needed for both of the two types of feed
systems, namely pressure feed systems and pump feed systems. The tank pres
sures for the first type are usually between 200 and 1800 psi and for the second
between 10 and 50 psig. Refs. 6-1, 6-3 to 6-5 give further descriptions. Inert
gases such as helium or nitrogen are the most common method of pressuriza
tion. In pump feed systems a small positive pressure in the tank is needed to
suppress pump cavitation. For cryogenic propellants this has been accom
plished by heating and vaporizing a small portion of the propellant taken
from the high-pressure discharge of the pump and feeding it into the propellant
tank, as shown in Fig. 1--4. This is a type of low-pressure gas feed system.
The pressurizing gas must not condense, or be soluble in the liquid propel
lant, for this can greatly increase the mass of required pressurant and the inert
mass of its pressurization system hardware. For example, nitrogen pressurizing
gas will dissolve in nitrogen tetroxide or in liquid oxygen and reduce the con
centration and density of the oxidizer. In general, about 2! times as much
nitrogen mass is needed for pressurizing liquid oxygen if compared to the
nitrogen needed for displacing an equivalent volume of water at the same
pressure. Oxygen and nitrogen tetroxide are therefore usually pressurized
with helium gas, which dissolves only slightly. The pressurizing gas must not
react chemically with the liquid propellant. Also, the gas must be dry, since
moisture can react with some propellants or dilute them.
The pressurizing gas above a cryogenic liquid is usually warmer than the
liquid. The heat transfer to the liquid cools the gas and that increases the
density; therefore a larger mass of gas is needed for pressurization even if
none of the gas dissolves in the liquid propellant. If there is major sloshing
and splashing in the tank during flight, the gas temperature can drop quickly,
causing irregularities in the tank pressure.
Chemical pressurization permits the injection of a small amount of fuel or
other suitable spontaneously ignitable chemical into the oxidizer tank (or vice
versa) which creates the pressurizing gas by combustion inside the propellant
tank. While ideally this type of pressurization system is very small and light, in
practice it has not usually given reproducible tank pressures, because of irre-
6.5. TANK PRESSURIZATION 219
gular combustion the sloshing of propellant in the tank during vehicle man
euvers has caused sudden cooling of the hot pressurizing gas and thus some
erratic tank pressure changes. This problem can be avoided by physically
separating the hot reactive gas from the liquid propellant by a piston or a
flexible bladder. If hot gas from a solid propellant gas generator of from the
decomposition of a monopropellant is used (instead of a high-pressure gas
supply), a substantial reduction in the gas and inert mass of the pressurizing
system can be achieved. For example, the pressurizing of hydrazine monopro
pellant by warm gas (from the catalytic decomposition of hydrazine) has been
successful for moderate durations.
The prepackaged compact experimental liquid propellant rocket engine
shown in Fig. 6-8 is unique. It uses a gelling agent to improve propellant safety
and density (see Section 7.5 and Ref. 7-11), a solid propellant for pressuriza
tion of propellant tanks, two concentric annular pistons (positive expulsion),
and a throttling and multiple restart capability. It allows missiles to lock on to
targets before or after launch, slow down and search for targets, loiter, man
euver, or speed up to a high terminal velocity. This particular experimental
engine, developed by TRW, has been launched from a regular Army mobile
launcher.
Graphite fiber
Electronic overwrapped
controls ___.. .." ""-.-......~. ........
propellant tank
I
Thrust chamber with
ablative liner and face
Gas
shutoff valve in injector
FIGURE ~- Simplified diagram of a compact pre-loaded, pressure-fed, bipropellant
experimental rocket engine aimed at propelling smart maneuvering ground-to-ground
missiles. It uses gelled red fuming nitric acid and gelled monomethylhydrazine as pro
pellants. A solid propellant gas generator provides the gas for tank pressurization and
the hot gases are isolated from the propellants by pistons. The concentric spray injector
allows restart, throttling, and flow shut-off at the injector face. The rocket engine is 6 in.
diameter and 23.5 in. long. (Courtesy of Space and Electronics Group, TRW, Inc.)
220 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
Estimating the Mass of the Pressurizing Gas
The major function of the pressurizing gas is to expel the propellants from their
tanks. In some propulsion system installations, a small amount of the pressur
ized gas also performs other functions such as the operation of valves and
controls. The first part of the gas leaving the high-pressure-gas storage tank
is at ambient temperature. If the high-pressure gas expands rapidly, then the
gas remaining in the tank undergoes essentially an isentropic expansion, caus
ing the temperature of the gas to decrease steadily; the last portions of the
pressurizing gas leaving the tank are very much colder than the ambient tem
perature and readily absorb heat from the piping and the tank walls. The
Joule-Thomson effect causes a further small temperature change.
A simplified analysis of the pressurization of a propellant tank can be made
on the basis of the conservation of energy principle by assuming an adiabatic
process (no heat transfer to or from the walls), an ideal gas, and a negligibly
small initial mass of gas in the piping and the propellant tank. Let the initial
condition in the gas tank be given by subscript O and the instantaneous con
ditions in the gas tank by subscript g and in the propellant tank by subscript p.
The gas energy after and before propellant expulsion is
(6-5)
The work done by the gas in displacing the propellants is given by Pp VP- Using
Eqs. 3-3 to 3-5, the initial storage gas mass m may be found.
0
+ +
CvPg Vo/ R CvPp Vp/ R Pp VP = mocv To
(6-6)
m 0 = (pg V 0 + Pp Vpk)/(RT 0)
This may be expressed as
mo =pgmo +pPVP k =pPVP ( k ) (6-7)
Po RT RT 1 - Pg/Po
0 0
The first term in this equation expresses the mass of gas required to empty a
completely filled propellant tank if the gas temperature is maintained at the
initial storage temperature T 0. The second term expresses the availability of the
storage gas as a function of the pressure ratio through which the gas expands.
Heating of the pressurizing gas reduces the storage gas and tank mass
requirements and can be accomplished by putting a heat exchanger into the
gas line. Heat from the rocket thrust chamber, the exhaust gases, or from other
devices can be used as the energy source. The reduction of storage gas mass
depends largely on the type and design of the heat exchanger and the duration.
If the expansion of the high-pressure gas proceeds slowly (e.g., with an
attitude control propulsion system with many short pulses over a long period
of time), then the gas expansion comes close to an isothermal process; heat is
6.6. TURBOPUMP FEED SYSTEMS AND ENGINE CYCLES 221
absorbed from the vehicle and the gas temperature does not decrease appreci
ably. Here T = Tg = Tr The actual process is between an adiabatic and an
0
isothermal process and may vary from flight to flight.
The heating and cooling effects of the tank and pipe walls, the liquid pro
pellants, and the values on the pressurizing gas require an iterative analysis.
The effects of heat transfer from sources in the vehicle, changes in the mission
profile, vaporization of the propellant in the tanks, and heat losses from the
tank to the atmosphere or space have to be included and the analyses can
become quite complex. The design of storage tanks therefore allows a reason
able excess of pressurizing gas to account for these effects, for ambient tem
perature variations, and for the absorption of gas by the propellant. Equation
6--7 is therefore valid only under ideal conditions.
Example 6-2. What air tank volume is required to pressurize the propellant tanks of a
9000-N thrust rocket thrust chamber using 90% hydrogen peroxide as a monopropel
lant at a chamber pressure of 2.00 MPa for 30 sec in conjunction with a solid catalyst?
The air tank pressure is 14 MPa and the propellant tank pressure is 3.0 MPa. Allow for
1.20% residual propellant.
SOLUTION. The exhaust velocity is 1300 m/sec and the required propellant flow can
be found from Eq. 3-42 (l;d = 1.06):
m= i;dF/c = 1.06 x 9000/1300 - 7.34 kg/sec
The total propellant required is m = 7 .34 kg/sec x 30 sec x 1.012 = 222.6 kg. The
density of 90% hydrogen peroxide is 1388 kg/m3 . The propellant volume
is 222.6/1388 = 0.160 m3 . With 5% allowed for ullage and excess propellants, Eq. 6---7
gives the required weight of air (R = 289 J/kg-K; To = 298 K; k = 1.40) for displacing
the liquid.
Pr VP k 3.0 X 106 X 0.J6 X J.05 X J.4
mo=--
RT0 [I - (pg/Po)] 289 x 298 x [I -(3/14)]
= I 0.4 kg of compressed air
With an additional 5% allowed for excess gas, the high-pressure tank volume will be
Vo= moRTo/Po = 1.05 x 10.4 x 289 x 298/(14 x 106 )
= 0.067 m3 .
6.6. TURBOPUMP FEED SYSTEMS AND ENGINE CYCLES
The principal components of a rocket engine with one type of turbopump
system are shown in the simplified diagram of Fig. 1-4. Here the propellants
are pressurized by means of pumps, which in turn are driven by turbines. These
222 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
turbines derive their power from the expansion of hot gases. Engines with
turbopumps are preferred for booster and sustainer stages of space launch
vehicles, long-range missiles, and in the past also for aircraft performance
augmentation. They are usually lighter than other types for these high thrust,
long duration applications. The inert hardware mass of the rocket engine
(without tanks) is essentially independent of duration. Examples can be seen
In Figs. 6--1 and 6--9 and also in Refs. 6--1, 6--2, and 6--6. For aircraft perfor
mance augmentation the rocket pump can be driven directly by the jet engine,
as in Ref. 6--12. From the turbopump feed system options depicted in Fig. 6--2,
the designer can select the most suitable concept for a particular application.
An engine cycle for turbopump-fed engines describes the specific propellant
flow paths through the major engine components, the method of providing the
hot gas to one or more turbines, and the method of handling the turbine
exhaust gases. There are open cycles and closed cycles. Open denotes that the
working fluid exhausting from the turbine is discharged overboard, after hav
ing been expanded in a nozzle of its own, or discharged into the nozzle of the
thrust chamber at a point in the expanding section far downstream of the nozle
throat. In closed cycles or topping cycles all the working fluid from the turbine
is injected into the engine combustion chamber to make the most efficient use
of its remaining energy. In closed cycles the turbine exhaust gas is expanded
through the full pressure ratio of the main thrust chamber nozzle, thus giving a
little more performance than the open cycles, where these exhaust gases expand
only through a relatively small pressure ratio. The overall engine performance
difference is typically between 1 and 8% of specific impulse and this is reflected
in even larger differences in vehicle performance.
Figure 6--9 shows the three most common cycles in schematic form.
Reference 6--13 shows variations of these cycles and also other cycles. The
gas generator cycle and the staged combustion cycle can use most of the
common liquid propellants. The expander cycle works best with vaporized
cryogenic hydrogen as the coolant for the thrust chamber, because it is an
excellent heat absorber and does not decompose. The schematic diagrams of
Fig. 6-9 show each cycle with a separate turbopump for fuel and for oxidier.
However, an arrangement with the fuel and oxdizer pump driven by the same
turbine is also feasible and sometimes reduces the hardware mass, volume, and
cost. The "best" cycle has to be selected on the basis of the mission, the
suitability of existing engines, and the criteria established for the particular
vehicle. There is an optimum chamber pressure and an optimum mixture
ratio for each application, engine cycle, or optimization criterion, such as
maximum range, lowest cost, or highest payload.
In the gas generator cycle the turbine inlet gas comes from a separate gas
generator. Its propellants can be supplied from separate propellant tanks or
can be bled off the main propellant feed system. This cycle is relatively simple;
the pressures in the liquid pipes and pumps are relatively low (which reduces
inert engine mass). It has less engine-specific impulse than an expander cycle or
a staged combustion cycle. The pressure ratio across the turbine is relatively
6.6. TURBOPUMP FEED SYSTEMS AND ENGINE CYCLES 223
Gas generator
Oxidizer
Oxidizer
turbine turbine
GAS GENERATOR CYCLE STAGED--COMBUSTION CYCLE
Fuel
turbine
EXPANDER CYCLE
FIGURE 6--9. Simplified diagrams of three engine cycles for liquid propellant rocket
engines. The spirals are a symbol for an axisymmetric cooling jacket where heat is
absorbed.
high, but the turbine or gas generator flow is small (I to 4% of total propellant
flow) if compared to closed cycles. Some early engines used a separate mono
propellant for creating the generator gas. The German V-2 missile engine used
hydrogen peroxide, which was decomposed by a catalyst. Typically, the turbine
exhaust gas is discharged overboard through one or two separate small low
area-ratio nozzles (at relatively low specific impulse), as shown schematically in
Fig. 1--4 and in the Vulcain engine or RS-68 engine listed in Table 10-3.
Alternatively, this turbine exhaust can be aspirated into the main flow through
openings in the diverging nozzle section, as shown schematically in Fig. 6-9.
This gas then protects the walls near the nozzle exit from high temperatures.
Both methods can provide a small amount of additional thrust. The gas gen
erator mixture ratio is usually fuel rich (in some engine it is oxidizer rich) so
224 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
that the gas temperatures are low enough (typically 900 to 1350 K) to allow the
use of uncooled turbine blades and uncooled nozzle exit segments. The RS-68
rocket engine, shown in Fig. 6-10, has a simple gas generator cycle. This engine
is the largest liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen rocket engine built to date. As can
be seen from the data in the figure, with a gas generator cycle the specific
impulse of the thrust chamber by itself is always a little higher than that of
the engine and the thrust of the thrust chamber is always slightly lower than
that of the engine.
In the expander cycle most of the engine coolant (usually hydrogen fuel) is
fed to low-pressure-ratio turbines after having passed through the cooling
jacket where it picked up energy. Part of the coolant, perhaps 5 to 15%,
bypasses the turbine (not shown in Fig. 6-9) and rejoins the turbine exhaust
flow before the entire coolant flow is injected into the engine combustion
chamber where it mixes and burns with the oxidizer (see Refs. 6-2 and
6-14). The primary advantages of the expander cycle are good specific impulse,
engine simplicity, and relatively low engine mass. In the expander cycle all the
propellants are fully burned in the engine combustion chamber and expanded
efficiently in the engine exhaust nozzle.
This cycle is used in the RLIO hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine, and dif
ferent versions of this engine have flown successfully in the upper stages of
several space launch vehicles. Data on the RL10-A3-3A are given in Table
10-3. A recent modification of this engine, the RLIOB-2 with an extendible
nozzle skirt, can be seen in Fig. 8-19 and data on this engine are contained in
Table 8-1. It delivers the highest specific impulse of any chemical rocket
engine to date. The RLIOB-2 flow diagram in Fig. 6-11 shows its expander
cycle. Heat absorbed by the thrust chamber cooling jacket gasifies and raises
the gas temperature of the hydrogen so that it can be used to drive the
turbine, which in turn drives a single-stage liquid oxygen pump (through a
gear case) and a two-stage liquid hydrogen pump. The cooling down of the
hardware to cryogenic temperatures is accomplished by flowing (prior to
engine start) cold propellant through cooldown valves. The pipes for dischar
ging the cooling propellants overboard are not shown here, but can be seen
in Fig. 8-19. Thrust is regulated by controlling the flow of hydrogen gas to
the turbine, using a bypass to maintain constant chamber pressure. Helium is
used as a means of power boost by actuating several of the larger valves
through solenoid-operated pilot valves.
In the staged combustion cycle, the coolant flow path through the cooling
jacket is the same as that of the expander cycle. Here a high-pressure pre
combustor (gas generator) burns all the fuel with part of the oxidizer to
provide high-energy gas to the turbines. The total turbine exhaust gas flow
is injected into the main combustion chamber where it burns with the remain
ing oxidizer. This cycle lends itself to high-chamber-pressure operation, which
allows a small thrust chamber size. The extra pressure drop in the precom
bustor and turbines causes the pump discharge pressures of both the fuel and
the oxidizer to be higher than with open cycles, requiring heavier and more
6.6. TURBOPUMP FEED SYSTEMS AND ENGINE CYCLES 225
- Four leg structural
support
Fuel turbopump
Oxygen
turbopump ---__,,..___.._.
Oxygen tank
pressurization Roll control
heat nozzle using
exchanger turbine
exhaust
Turbine
exhaust
nozzle
Regenerative cooled thrust
chamber w~h nozzle throat
Parameter Thrust chamber Engine
Specific impulse at sea level (max.), sec 368 362
Specific impulse in vacuum (max.), sec 421 415
Thrust, at sea level, !bf 640,700 650,000
Thrust in vacuum !bf 732,400 745,000
Mixture ratio 6.74 6.0
FIGURE 6--10. Simplified view of the RS-68 rocket engine with a gas generator cycle.
For engine data see Table 10-3. (Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne
Propulsion and Power.)
226 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
Oxidizer flow
control valve
Regeneratively
cooled thrust
chamber and
nozzle
Liquid
hydrogen .,
Fuel pump/ Turbine
Fuel cooldown and
pressure relief valve
FIGURE 6--11. Schematic flow diagram of the RLIOB-2 upper stage rocket engine. For
data see Table 8-1. (Courtesy of Pratt & Whitney, a division of United Technologies.)
complex pumps, turbines, and piping. The turbine flow is relatively high and
the turbine pressure drop is low, when compared to an open cycle. The
staged combustion cycle gives the highest specific impulse, but it is more
complex and heavy. In contrast, an open cycle can allow a relatively simple
engine, lower pressures, and can have a lower production cost. A variation of
the staged combustion cycle is used in the Space Shuttle main engine, as
shown in Figs. 6-1 and 6-12. This engine actually uses two separate precom
bustion chambers, each mounted directly on a separate main turbopump. In
addition, there are two more turbopumps for providing a boost pressure to
the main pumps, but their turbines are not driven by combustion gases;
instead, high-pressure liquid oxygen drives one booster pump and evaporated
hydrogen drives the other. The injector of this reusable liquid propellant
high-pressure engine is shown in Fig. 9-6 and performance data are given
in Tables 10-1 and 10-3. While the space shuttle main engine (burning
hydrogen with oxygen) has fuel-rich preburners, oxidizer-rich preburners
are used in the RD 120 engine (kerosene/oxygen) and other Russian rocket
engines. See Table I 0-5. Another example of a staged combustion cycle is the
Russian engine RD253; all of the nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer and some of the
unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine fuel are burned in the precombustor, and
the remaining fuel is injected directly into the main combustion chamber, as
shown in Table 10-5.
6.7. FLOW AND PRESSURE BALANCE 227
Hydrogen Low pressure
fuel inlet fuel (booster) Low pressure
turbopump driven oxygen
by hot gasified H2 turbopump Preburner
driven by and
liquid oxygen high pressure
turbine oxygen
turbopump
Preburner Pa rt of oxygen
and Fuel flow is pressurized
turbopump to a higher pressure
with 3-stage with a separate impeller
Hydrogen pump
Coolant
control
valve
Thrust chamber
gas exhaust
FIGURE 6-12. Flow diagram for the staged combustion cycle of the Space Shuttle
Main Engine (SSME) using liquid oxygen and a liquid hydrogen fuel. (Courtesy of
The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power.)
6.7. FLOW AND PRESSURE BALANCE
From an inspection of the schematic flow diagram of an engine with a gas
generator in Fig. 1--4, the following basic feed system relationships are readily
m m
deduced. The flow through both pumps and must equal the respective
1 0
propellant flow through the gas generator mgg and one or more thrust cham
bers me· With some cycles mgg is zero. See equation on Section 10-2.
(6-8)
me = (mo)c + (m1 )c (6-9)
mgg = (mo)gg + (m1 )gg (6-10)
228 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
In the turbopump the torques, powers, and shaft speeds must match. The
balance of shaft speeds N can be simply written as
(6-11)
where a and af are gear ratios. If no gears are used, a = af = 1. The power
0 0
balance implies that the power of turbine PT equals the power consumed by
pumps and auxiliaries. The power is expressed as the product of torque L and
shaft speed N:
(6-12)
where Pb represents the bearing, seal, friction, and transmission power losses.
If there are no gears in a particular turbopump, then
NT= No= Nr (6-13)
LT = Lo + Lf + Lb (6-14)
The pressure balance equations for the fuel line at a point downstream of
the fuel pump can be written as
(pf)d = (pf)s + (Llp)pump
= (Llp)main fuel system+ Pl (6-15)
=
(Ll)generator fuel system+ Pgg
Here the fuel pump discharge pressure (pf )d equals the fuel pump suction
pressure (pf )s plus the pressure rise across the pump (Llp)pump; this in turn
equals the chamber pressures p plus all the pressure drops in the main fuel
1
system downstream of the pump, and this is further equal to the chamber
pressure in the gas generator combustion chamber Pgg augmented by all the
pressure losses in the fuel piping between the generator and the downstream
side of the fuel pump. The pressure drop in the main fuel system usually
includes the losses in the cooling jacket and the pressure decrease in the injec
tor. Equations 6-8 to 6~15 relate to a steady-state condition. A similar pressure
balance is needed for the oxidizer flow. The transients and the dynamic change
conditions are rather complex but have been analyzed using iterative proce
dures and digital computers.
6.8. ROCKET ENGINES FOR MANEUVERING, ORBIT ADJUSTMENTS,
OR ATTITUDE CONTROL
These engines have usually a set of small thrusters, that are installed at various
places in a vehicle, and a common pressurized feed system, similar to Figures
6.8. ROCKET ENGINES FOR MANEUVERING 229
1-3, 4-13, or 6-13. They are called reaction control systems or auxiliary rockets
as contrasted to higher-thrust primary or boost propulsion systems in Table 6---1.
Most use storable liquid propellants, require a highly accurate repeatability of
pulsing, a long life in space, and/or a long-term storage with loaded propellants
in flight tanks. Figure 4-13 shows that it requires 12 thrusters for the applica
tion of pure torques about three vehicle axes. If a three-degree-of-rotation
freedom is not a requrement, or if torques can be combined with some transla
tion maneuvers, fewer thrusters will be needed. These auxiliary rocket engines
are commonly used in spacecraft or missiles for the accurate control of flight
trajectories, orbit adjustments, or attitude control of the vehicle. References 6---1
and 6---2 give information on several of these. Figure 6---13 shows a simplified
flow diagram for a post-boost control rocket engine, with one larger rocket
thrust chamber for changing the velocity vector and eight small thrusters for
attitude control.
Section 4.6 describes various space trajectory correction maneuvers and
satellite station-keeping maneuvers that are typically performed by these
small auxiliary liquid propellant rocket engines with multiple thrusters.
Attitude control can be provided both while a primary propulsion system (of
a vehicle or of a stage) is operating and while its auxiliary rocket system
operates by itself. For instance, this is done to point satellite's telescope into
a specific orientation or to rotate a spacecraft's main thrust chamber into the
desired direction for a vehicle turning maneuver.
A good method for achieving accurate velocity corrections or precise angu
lar positions is to use pure modulation, that is, to fire some of the thrusters in a
pulsing mode (for example, fire repeatedly for 0.020 sec, each time followed by a
pause of perhaps 0.020 to 0.100 sec). The guidance system determines the
maneuver to be undertaken and the vehicle control system sends command
signals to specific thrusters for the number of pulses needed to accomplish this
maneuver. Small liquid propellant engine systems are uniquely capable of these
pulsing operations. Some thrusters have been tested for more than 300,000
pulses. For very short pulse durations the specific impulse is degraded by 5
to 25%, because the performance during the thrust build-up and thrust decay
period (at lower chamber pressure) is inferior to operating only at the rated
chamber pressure and the transient time becomes a major portion of the total
pulse time.
Ballistic missile defense vehicles usually have highly maneuverable upper
stages. These require substantial side forces (200 to 6000 N) during the final
closing maneuvers just prior to reaching the target. In concept the system is
similar to that of Fig. 6-13, except that the larger thrust chamber would be at
right-angles to the vehicle axis. A similar system for terminal maneuvers, but
using solid propellants, is shown in Fig. 11-28.
The Space Shuttle performs its reaction control with 38 different thrusters,
as shown schematically in Figs. 1-13 and 6-4; this includes several duplicate
(spare or redundant) thrusters. Selected thrusters are used for different man
euvers, such as space orbit corrections, station keeping, or positioning the
230 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
High-pressure helium tank
Pressure switch
Vent service valve (2)
Monomethyl Nitrogen
hydrazine tank tetroxide tank
Roll thruster with
control valves (4)
Pitch and yaw thrusters
with control valves (4)
Axial thrust chamber
(really pointing down
perpendicular to paper)
with its control valves
and gimbal mounting
Vehicle
outer skin
FIGURE 6-13. Schematic flow diagram of the helium-pressurized, bipropellant rocket
engine system of the fourth stage of the Peacekeeper ballistic missile, which provides the
terminal velocity (in direction and magnitude) to each of several warheads. It has one
larger gimballed thrust chamber for trajectory translation maneuvers and eight small
thrusters (with scarfed nozzles) for attitude control in pitch, yaw, and roll. (Courtesy of
USAF.)
6.8. ROCKET ENGINES FOR MANEUVERING 231
Space Shuttle for reentry or visual observations. These small restartable rocket
engines are also used for space rendezvous or docking maneuvers, where one
spacecraft slowly approaches another and locks itself to the other, without
causing excessive impact forces during this docking manuever. This docking
operation requires rotational and translational maneuvers from a series of
rocket engines.
Broadly, the application of pure torque to spacecraft can be divided into
two classes, mass expulsion types (rockets) and nonmass expulsion types.
Nonmass expulsion types include momentum storage, gravity gradient, solar
radiation, and magnetic systems. Some space satellites are equipped with both
the mass and nonmass expulsion types. Reaction wheels or flywheels, a momen
tum storage device, are particularly well suited to obtaining vehicle angular
position control with high accuracies of less than 0.01° deviation and low
vehicle angular rates of less than 10-5 degrees/sec with relatively little expen
diture of energy. The vehicle angular momentum is changed by accelerating ( or
decelerating) the wheel. Of course, when the wheel speed reaches the maximum
( or minimum) permissible, no further electrical motor torquing is possible; the
wheel must be decelerated (or accelerated) to have its momentum removed (or
augmented), a function usually accomplished through the simultaneous use of
small attitude control rockets, which apply a torque to the vehicle in the
opposite direction.
The propellants for auxiliary rockets fall into three categories: cold gas jets
(also called inert gas jets), warm or heated gas jets, and chemical combustion
rockets, such as bipropellant liquid propellant rockets. The specific impulse is
typically 50 to 120 sec for cold gas systems and 105 to 250 sec for warm gas
systems. Warm gas systems can use inert gas with an electric heater or a
monopropellant which is catalytically and/or thermally decomposed.
Bipropellant attitude control thrust chambers allow an Is of 220 to 325 sec
and have varied from 5 to 4000 N thrust; the highest thrusts apply to large
spacecraft. All basically use pressurized feed systems with multiple thrusters
or thrust chambers equipped with fast-acting, positive-closing precision
valves. Many systems use small, uncooled, metal-constructed supersonic
exhaust nozzles strategically located on the periphery of the spacecraft. Gas
jets are used typically for low thrust (up to 10 N) and low total impulse (up
to 4000 N-sec). They have been used on smaller satellites and often only for
roll control.
Small liquid monopropellant and liquid bipropellant rocket units are
common in auxiliary rocket systems for thrust levels typically above 2 N
and total impulse values above 3000 N-sec. Hydrazine is the most common
monopropellant used in auxiliary control rockets; nitrogen tetroxide and
monomethylhydrazine is a common bipropellant combination. The next
chapter contains data on all three categories of these propellants, and
Chapter 10 shows diagrams of small auxiliary rocket engines and their
thrusters.
232 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
Combination systems are also in use. Here a bipropellant with a relatively
high value of / 5, such as N 20 4 and N 2H 4, is used in the larger thrusters,
which consume most of the propellant; then several simple monopropellant
thrusters (with a lower / used for attitude control pulsing, usually consume
5),
a relatively small fraction of the total fuel. Another combination system is to
employ bipropellant or monopropellant thrusters for adding a velocity incre
ment to a flight vehicle or to bleed or pulse some of the pressurizing gas, such
as helium, through small nozzles controlled by electromagnetic valves to
provide roll control. The specific mission requirements need to be analyzed
to determine which type or combination is most advantageous for a parti
cular application.
Special thruster designs exist which can be used in a bipropellant mode at
higher thrust and also in a monopropellant mode for lower thrust. This can
offer an advantage in some spacecraft applications. An example is the TRW
secondary combustion augmented thruster (SCAT), which uses hydrazine
and nitrogen tetroxide, is restartable, vaporizes the propellants prior to
injection and therefore has very efficient combustion (over 99%), can oper
ate over a wide range of mixture ratios, and can be throttled from 5 to 15
!bf thrust.
6.9. VALVES AND PIPE LINES
Valves control the flows of liquids and gases and pipes conduct these fluids to
the intended components. There are no rocket engines without them. There are
many different types of valves. All have to be reliable, lightweight, leakproof,
and must withstand intensive vibrations and very loud noises. Table 6-6 gives
several key classification categories for rocket engine valves. Any one engine
will use only some of the valves listed here.
The art of designing and making valves is based, to a large extent, on
experience. A single chapter cannot do justice to it by describing valve design
and operation. References 6-1 and 6-2 decribe the design of specific valves,
lines, and joints. Often the design details, such as clearance, seat materials, or
opening time delay present development difficulties. With many of these valves,
any leakage or valve failure can cause a failure of the rocket unit itself. All
valves are tested for two qualities prior to installation; they are tested for
leaks-through the seat and also through the glands-and for functional
soundness or performance.
The propellant valves in high thrust units handle relatively large flows at
high service pressures. Therefore, the forces necessary to actuate the valves
are large. Hydraulic or pneumatic pressure, controlled by pilot valves,
operates the larger valves; these pilot valves are in turn actuated by a
solenoid or a mechanical linkage. Essentially this is a means of power
boost.
6.9. VALVES AND PIPE LINES 233
TABLE 6-6. Classification of Valves Used in Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines
I. Fluid: fuel; oxidizer; cold pressurized gas; hot turbine gas.
2. Application or Use: main propellant control; thrust chamber valve (dual or single);
bleed; drain; fill; by-pass; preliminary stage flow; pilot valve; safety valve; overboard
dump; regulator; gas generator control; sequence control; isolation of propellant or
high-pressure gas prior to start.
3. Mode of Actuation: automatically operated (by solenoid, pilot valve, trip
mechanism, pyrotechnic, etc.); manually operated; pressure-operated by air, gas,
propellant, or hydraulic fluid (e.g., check valve, tank vent valve, pressure regulator,
relief valve), with or without position feedback, rotary or linear actuator.
4. The flow magnitude determines the size of the valve.
5. Duty cycle: single or multiple pulse operation; reusable for other flights; long or
short life.
6. Valve Type: normally open; normally closed; normally partly open; two-way;
three-way, with/without valve position feedback; ball valve, gate valve, butterfly type,
spring loaded.
7. Temperature and pressure allow classification by high, low, or cryogenic
temperature fluids, or high or low pressure or vacuum capability.
8. Accessible or not accessible to inspection, servicing, or replacement of valve or its
seal.
Two valves commonly used in pressurized feed systems are isolation
valves (when shut, they isolate or shut off a portion of the propulsion
system) and latch valves; they require power for brief periods during move
ments, such as to open or shut, but need no power when latched or
fastened into position.
A very simple and very light valve is a burst diaphragm. It is essentially a
circular disk of material which blocks a pipeline and is designed so that it will
fail and burst at a predetermined pressure differential. Burst diaphragms are
positive seals and prevent leakage, but they can be used only once. The
German Wasser/all antiaircraft missile used four burst disks; two were in
high pressure air lines and two were in the propellant lines.
Figure 6-14 shows a main liquid oxygen valve. It is normally closed, rotary
actuated, cryogenic, high pressure, high flow, reusable ball valve, allowing
continuous throtting, a controlled rate of opening through a crank and hy
draulic piston (not shown), with a position feedback and anti-icing controls.
Pressure regulators are special valves which are used frequently to regulate
gas pressures. Usually the discharge pressure is regulated to a predetermined
standard pressure value by continuously throttling the flow, using a piston,
flexible diaphragm, or electromagnet as the actuating mechanism. Regulators
can be seen in Figs. 1-3 and 6-13.
The various fluids in a rocket engine are conveyed by pipes or lines, usually
made of metal and joined by fittings or welds. Their design must provide for
234 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
Hydraulic
actuator- ...
housing
Thermal
insulator Closed
Seal
liftoff
Open
Cam follower
Bearing Inlet pin and beanng Section A·A
seal
FIGURE 6-14. The SSME main oxidizer valve is a low-pressure drop ball valve repre
sentative of high-pessure large valves used in rocket engines. The ball and its integral
shaft rotate in two bearings. The seal is a machined plastic ring spring-loaded by a
bellows against the inlet side of the ball. Two cams on the shaft lift the seal a short
distance off the ball within the first few degrees of ball rotation. The ball is rotated by a
precision hydraulic actuator (not shown) through an insulating coupling. (Courtesy of
The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power.)
thermal expansion and provide support to mm1m1ze vibration effects. For
gimballed thrust chambers it is necessary to provide flexibility in the piping
to allow the thrust axis to be rotated through a small angle, typically ±3 to
10°. This flexibility is provided by flexible pipe joints and/or by allowing
pipes to deflect when using two or more right-angle turns in the lines. The
high-pressure propellant feed lines of the SSME have both flexible joints and
right-angle bends, as shown in Figs 6-1 and 6--15. This joint has flexible
bellows as a seal and a universal joint-type mechanical linkage with two
sets of bearings for carrying the separating loads imposed by the high
pressure.
Sudden closing of valves can cause water hammer in the pipelines, leading to
unexpected pressure rises which can be destructive to propellant system com
ponents. An analysis of this water hammer phenomenon will allow determina
tion of the approximate maximum pressure (Refs. 6-15 and 6-16). The friction
of the pipe and the branching of pipelines reduce this maximum pressure.
6.10. ENGINE SUPPORT STRUCTURE 235
Bellows seal
Sleeve
FIGURE 6-15. Flexible high-pressure joint with external gimbal rings for a high-pres
sure hot turbine exhaust gas. (Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne
Propulsion and Power.)
Water hammer can also occur when admitting the initial flow of high-pressure
propellant into evacuated pipes. The pipes are under vacuum to remove air and
prevent the forming of gas bubbles in the propellant flow, which can cause
combustion problems.
Many liquid rocket engines have filters in their lines. This is necessary to
prevent dirt, particles, or debris, such as small pieces from burst diaphragms,
from entering precision valves or regulators (where debris can cause a mal
function) or from plugging small injection holes, which could cause hot streaks
in the combustion gases, in turn causing a thrust chamber failure.
Occasionally a convergent-divergent venturi section, with a sonic velocity at
its throat, is placed into one or both of the liquid propellant lines. The merits
are that it maintains constant flow and prevents pressure disturbances from
traveling upstream. This can include the propagating of chamber pressure
oscillations or coupling with thrust chamber combustion instabilities. The
venturi section can also help in minimizing some water hammer effects in a
system with multiple banks of thrust chambers.
6.10. ENGINE SUPPORT STRUCTURE
Most of the larger rocket engines have their own mounting structure or sup
port structure. On it the major components are mounted. It also transmits the
236 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
thrust force to the vehicle. Welded tube structures or metal plate/sheet metal
assemblies have been used. In some large engines the thrust chamber is used as
a structure and the turbopump, control boxes, or gimbal actuators are attached
to it.
In addition to the thrust load, an engine structure has to withstand forces
imposed by vehicle maneuvers (in some cases a side acceleration of 10 g 0),
vibration forces, actuator forces for thrust vector control motions, and loads
from transportation over rough roads.
In low-thrust engines with multiple thrusters there often is no separate
engine mounting structure; the major components are in different locations
of the vehicle, connected by tubing, wiring, or piping, and each is usually
mounted directly to the vehicle or spacecraft structure.
PROBLEMS
1. Enumerate and explain the merits and disadvantages of pressurized and turbopump
feed systems.
2. In a turbopump it is necessary to do more work in the pumps if the thrust chamber
operating pressure is raised. This of course requires an increase in turbine gas flow
which, when exhausted, adds little to the engine specific impulse. If the chamber
pressure is raised too much, the decrease in performance due to an excessive portion
of the total propellant flow being sent through the turbine and the increased mass of
the turbopump will outweigh the gain in specific impulse that can be attained by
increased chamber pressure and also by increased thrust chamber nozzle exit area.
Outline in detail a method for determining the optimum chamber pressure where the
sea level performance will be a maximum for a rocket engine that operates in prin
ciple like the one shown in Fig. 1--4.
3. The engine performance data for a turbopump rocket system are as follows:
Engine system specific impulse 272 sec
Engine system mixture ratio 2.52
Engine system thrust 40,000 N
Oxidizer vapor flow to pressurize oxidizer 0.003% of total
tank oxidizer flow
Propellant flow through turbine 2.1 % of total
propellant flow
Gas generator mixture ratio 0.23
Gas generator specific impulse 85 sec
Determine performance of the thrust chamber 1.,, r, F (see Sect. 10-2).
4. For a pulsing rocket engine, assume a simplified parabolic pressure rise of 0.005 sec,
a steady-state short period of full chamber pressure, and a parabolic decay of 0.007
sec approximately as shown in the sketch. Plot curves of the following ratios as a
function of operating time t from t = 0.013 tot= 0.200 sec; (a) average pressure to
PROBLEMS 237
Pc
Time
ideal steady-state pressure (with zero rise or decay time); (b) average 1 to ideal
5
steady-state 1 (c) average F to ideal steady-state F.
5;
5. For a total impulse of 100 !bf-sec compare the volume and system weights of a pulsed
propulsion system using different gaseous propellants, each with a single spherical
gas storage tank (at 3500 psi and 0°C). A package of small thrust nozzles with piping
and controls is provided which weighs 5.2 lb. The gaseous propellants are hydrogen,
nitrogen, and argon (see Table 7-3).
6. Compare several systems for a potential roll control application which requires four
thrusters of I !bf each to operate for a cumulative duration of 2 min each. Include the
following:
Pressurized helium Cold
Pressurized nitrogen Cold
Pressurized krypton Cold
Pressurized helium at 500°F (electrically heated)
The pressurized gas is stored at 5000 psi in a single spherical fiber-reinforced plastic
tank; use a tensile strength of200,000 psi and a density of0.050 lbm/in.3 with a 0.012
in. thick aluminum inner liner as a seal against leaks. Neglect the gas volume in the
pipes, valves, and thrusters, but assume the total hardware mass of these to be about
1.3 lbm. Use Table 7-3. Make estimates of the tank volume and total system weight.
Discuss the relative merits of these systems.
7. Make tables comparing the merits and disadvantages of engines using the gas gen
erator cycle and engines having the staged combustion cycle.
8. Prepare dimensioned rough sketches of the two propellant tanks needed for operat
ing a single RD253 engine (Table 10-5) for 80 sec at full thrust and an auxiliary
rocket system using the same propellants, with eight thrust chambers, each of 100 kg
thrust, but operating on the average with only two of the eight firing at any one time,
with a duty cycle of 12 percent (fires only 12% of the time), but for a total flight time
of 4.00 hours. Describe any assumptions that were made with the propellant budget,
the engines, or the vehicle design, as they affect the amount of propellant.
9. Table 10-5 shows that the RD 120 rocket engine can operate at 85% of full thrust
and with a mixture ratio variation of ±10.0%. Assume a 1.0% unavailable residual
238 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
propellant. The allowance for operational factors, loading uncertainties, off-nominal
rocket performance, and a contingency is 1.27% for the fuel and 1.15% for the
oxidizer.
(a) In a particular flight the average thrust was 98.0% of nominal and the mixture
ratio was off by + 2.00% (oxidizer rich). What percent of the total fuel and
oxidizer loaded into the vehicle will remain unused at thrust termination?
(b) If we want to run at a fuel-rich mixture in the last 20% of the flight duration (in
order to use up all the intended flight propellant), what would the mixture ratio
have to be for this last period?
(c) In the worst possible scenario with maximum throttling and extreme mixture
ratio excursion (but operating for the nominal duration), what is the largest
possible amount of unused oxidizer or unused fuel in the tanks?
SYMBOLS
a gear ratio
F thrust, N (]bf)
g acceleration of gravity at sea level, 9.8066 m/sec2
0
specific impulse, sec
/5
k specific heat ratio
L shaft torque, m-N (ft-lbf)
m propellant mass, kg (lbm)
m
mass flow rate, kg/sec (lb/sec)
N shaft speed, rpm (rad/sec)
p pressure, N/m2 (psi)
t,,.p pressure drop, N/m2 (psi)
P power, W
r mixture ratio (oxidizer to fuel mass flow rate)
t time, sec
T absolute temperature, K
u vehicle velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
V volume flow rate, m3 /sec (ft3 /sec)
w total propellant weight, N (]bf)
w weight flow rate, N/sec (]bf/sec)
a nozzle divergence angle
Subscripts
b bearings, seals
c chamber or thrust chamber
d discharge side
f fuel
gg gas generator
oa overall
REFERENCES 239
o oxidizer
s suction side
tp tank pressurization
I chamber (stagnation condition)
2 nozzle exit
3 ambient atmosphere
REFERENCES
6-1. D. K. Huzel and D. H. Huang. Design of Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines,
Revised edition, AIAA, 1992, 437 pages.
6--2. G. G. Gakhun, V. I. Baulin, et ala., Construction and Design of Liquid Propellant
Rocket Engines (in Russian), Konstruksiya i Proyektirovaniye Zhidkostniyk
Raketnykh Dvigateley, Mashinostroyeniye, Moscow, 1989, 424 pages.
6--3. C. J. G. Dixon and J. G. B. Marshall, "Mathematical Modelling of Bipropellant
Combined Propulsion Subsystems," A/AA Paper 90-2303, 26th Joint Propulsion
Conference, July 1990; and Design Guide for Pressurized Gas Systems, Vols. I and
II, prepared by IIT Research Institute, NASA Contract NAS7-388, March 1966.
6--4. H. C. Hearn, "Design and Development of a large Bipropellant Blowdown
Propulsion System," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 11, No. 5,
September-October 1995.
6--5. H. C. Hearn, "Evaluation of Bipropellant Pressurization Concepts for
Spacecraft," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 19, July 1982, pp. 320-325.
6-6. National Space Transportation System Reference, Vol. I, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, Washington, DC, June 1988 (description of Space
Shuttle system and operation).
6--7. J. I. Hochsten, H.-C. Ji, and J. Ayelott, "Prediction of Self-Pressurization Rate of
Cryogenic Propellant Tankage," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 6, No. I,
January-February 1990, pp. 11-17.
6--8. B. Morton, M. Elgersma, and R. Playter, "Analysis of Booster Vehicle Slosh
Stability during Ascent to Orbit," A/AA Paper 90-1876, July 1990, 7 pages.
6--9. J. J. Pocha, "Propellant Slosh in Spacecraft and How to Live with It," Aerospace
Dynamics, Vol. 20, Autumn 1986, pp. 26--31.
6-10. G. P. Purohit and L. D. Loudenback, "Application of Etched Disk Stacks in
Surface Tension Propellant Management Devices," Journal of Propulsion and
Power, Vol. 7, No. I, January-February 1991, pp. 22-30.
6-11. J. R. Rollins, R. K. Grove, and D.R. Walling, Jr. "Design and Qualification of a
Surface Tension Propellant Tank for an Advanced Spacecraft," A/AA Paper 88-
2848, 24th Joint Propulsion Conference, 1988.
6--12. H. Grosdemange and G. Schaeffer. "The SEPR 844 Reuseable Liquid Rocket
Engine for Mirage Combat Aircraft", A/AA Paper 90-1835, July 1990.
6--13. D. Manski, C. Goertz, H. D. Sassnick, J. R. Hulka, B. D. Goracke, and D. J. H.
Levack, "Cycles for Earth to Orbit Propulsion," Journal of Propulsion and Power,
A/AA, Vol. 14, No. 5, September-October 1998.
240 LIQUID PROPELLANT ROCKET ENGINE FUNDAMENTALS
6--14. J. R. Brown. "Expander Cycle Engines for Shuttle Cryogenic Upper Stages,
AIAA Paper 83~1311, 1983.
6--15. R. P. Prickett, E. Mayer, and J. Hermel, "Waterhammer in Spacecraft Propellant
Feed Systems," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 8, No. 3, May~June 1992.
6--16. Chapter 9 in: I. Karassik, W. C. Krutzsch, W. H. Fraser, and J.P. Messina (eds),
Pump Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1976 (pumps and
water hammer).
CHAPTER 7
LIQUID PROPELLANTS
The classification of liquid propellants has been given in Section 6.1 of the
preceding chapter. In this chapter we discuss properties, performance, and
characteristics of selected common liquid propellants. These characteristics
affect the engine design, test facilities, propellant storage and handling.
Today we commonly use three liquid bipropellant combinations. Each of
their propellants will be described further in this chapter. They are: (1) the
cryogenic oxygen-hydrogen propellant system, used in upper stages and some
times booster stages of space launch vehicles; it gives the highest specific
impulse for a non-toxic combination, which makes it best for high vehicle
velocity missions; (2) the liquid oxygen-hydrocarbon propellant combination,
used for booster stages (and a few second stages) of space launch vehicles;
its higher average density allows a more compact booster stage, when com
pared to the first combination; also, historically, it was developed before the
first combination and was originally used for ballistic missiles; (3) several
storable propellant combinations, used in large rocket engines for first and
second stages of ballistic missiles and in almost all bipropellant low-thrust,
auxiliary or reaction control rocket engines (this term is defined below); they
allow long-term storage and almost instant readiness to start without the
delays and precautions that come with cryogenic propellants. In Russia the
nitric acid-hydrocarbon combination was used in ballistic missiles many years
ago. Today Russia and China favor nitrogen tetroxide-unsymmetrical
dimethylhydrazine or UDMH for ballistic missiles and auxiliary engines. The
USA started with nitrogen tetroxide and a fuel mixture of 50% UDMH with
50% hydrazine in the Titan missile. For auxiliary engines in many satellites and
upper stages the USA has used the bipropellant of nitrogen tetroxide with
241
242 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
monomethylhydrazine. The orbit maneuvering system of the Space Shuttle
uses it. Alternatively, many US satellites have used monopropellant hydrazine
for auxiliary engines.
A comparative listing of various performance quantities for a number of
propellant combinations is given in Table 5-5 and in Ref. 7-1. Some important
physical properties of various propellants are given in Table 7-1. For compar
ison water is also listed. Specific gravities and vapor pressures are shown in
Figs. 7-1 and 7-2.
7.1. PROPELLANT PROPERTIES
It is important to distinguish between the characteristics and properties of the
liquid propellants (the fuel and oxidizer liquids in their unreacted condition)
and those of the hot gas mixture, which result from the reaction in the combus
tion chamber. The chemical nature of the liquid propellants determines the
properties and characteristics of both of these types. Unfortunately, none of
the practical, known propellants have all the desirable properties, and the
selection of the propellant combination is a compromise of various factors,
such as those listed below.
Economic Factors
Availability in large quantity and a low cost are very important considerations
in the selection of a propellant. In military applications, consideration has to be
given to logistics of production, supply, and other possible military uses. The
production process should be simple, requiring only ordinary chemical equip
ment and available raw materials. It is usually more expensive to use a toxic or
cryogenic propellant than a storable, non-toxic one, because it requires addi
tional steps in the operation, more safety provisions, additional design features,
longer check-out procedures, and often more trained personnel.
Performance of Propellants
The performance can be compared on the basis of the specific impulse, the
effective exhaust velocity, the characteristic velocity, the specific propellant
consumption, the ideal exhaust velocity, or other engine parameters. They
have been explained in Chapter 3, 5 and 6. The specific impulse and exhaust
velocity are functions of pressure ratio, specific heat ratio, combustion tem
perature, mixture ratio, and molecular mass. Values of performance para
meters for various propellant combinations can be calculated with a high
degree of accuracy and several are listed in Table 5-5. Very often the per
formance is expressed in terms of flight performance parameters for a given
rocket application, as explained in Chapter 4. Here the average density, the
Temperature, K
50 100 150 200 250 300 350
1.6 I I I I ' I
'"'N :.-Liquid fluorine W
-:..'
urh
nin
i
.
t~1n Ma--
I'\ I g nitric . Cid
87 ac,d
1.4 ,i; hydrogen per-ox..id e- .k
r-N 0
.... 4
1, ~I'-...
1.2 " ~(· " - I;;:-- - .- - Nitromethane
'Q' Urfu( alfoi;, I I
""'0~-t9l, " , Hydrazine hydrate
1.0 H~drazin~ --j--"' -=t""'
~ - 75 I Aniline
I\, ... ~hyt a/coho/ - I I
UD41,-, k"TRP-1
- I L
Liquid a I
~~ ~ Aviation gasoline
- t--
0.6 .,..._ . I I I...._ r--.. r--
Liquid eth ""'--
-~ ~~ r--,......_
Liqu·d
0.4 "'~ ' meth
r-,....~
r-,.....,,_
["\
0.2
I\
vliquid hydrogen
r""',.
0
-400 -300 -200 -100 0 + 100 +200
Temperature, °F
FIGURE 7-1. Specific gravities of several liquid propellants as a function of temperature.
244 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
TABLE 7-1. Some Physical Properties of Several Common Liquid Propellants
Liquid Liquid Monomethyl-
Propellant Fluorine Hydrazine Hydrogen Methane hydrazine
Chemical formula F2 N2H4 H2 CH4 CH1NHNH2
Molecular mass 38.0 32.05 2.016 16.03 46.072
Melting or freezing 53.54 274.69 14.0 90.5 220.7
point (K)
Boiling point (K) 85.02 386.66 20.4 111.6 360.6
Heat of vaporization 166.26b 44_7h 446 510h 875
(kJ/kg) (298.15K)
Specific heat 0.368 0.736 I. 75h 0.835h 0.698
(kcal/kg-K) (85 K) (293 K) (20.4 K) (293 K)
0.357 0.758 0.735
(69.3 K) (338 K) (393 K)
Specific gravity' 1.636 1.005 0.071 0.424 0.8788
(66 K) (293 K) (20.4 K) (111.5 K) (293 K)
1.440 0.952 0.076 0.857
(93 K) (350 K) (14 K) (311 K)
Viscosity 0.305 0.97 0.024 0.12 0.855
(centipoise) (77.6 K) (298 K) (14.3 K) (111.6 K) (293 K)
0.397 0.913 0.013 0.22 0.40
(70 K) (330 K) (20.4 K) (90.5 K) (344 K)
Vapor pressure 0.0087 0.0014 0.2026 0.033 0.0073
(MPa) (JOO K) (293 K) (23 K) (JOO K) (300 K)
0.00012 0.016 0.87 0.101 0.638
(66.5 K) (340 K) (30 K) (117 K) (428 K)
aRed fuming nitric acid (RFNA) has 5 to 20% dissolved N02 with an average molecular weight of
about 60, and a density and vapor pressure somewhat higher than those of pure nitric acid.
hA t boiling point.
cReference for specific gravity ratio: 103 kg/m3 or 62.42 lbm/ft3 .
specific impulse, and the engine mass ratio usually enter into a complex flight
relation equation.
For high performance a high content of chemical energy per unit of propel
lant mixture is desirable because it permits a high chamber temperature. A low
molecular mass of the product gases of the propellant combination is also
desirable. It can be accomplished by using fuels rich in combined hydrogen,
which is liberated during the reaction. A low molecular mass is obtained if a
large portion of the hydrogen gas produced does not combine with oxygen. In
general, therefore, the best mixture ratio for many bipropellants is not neces
sarily the stoichiometric one (whch results in complete oxidation and yields a
7.1. PROPELLANT PROPERTIES 245
Unsymmetrical
Dimethyl-
Nitric Acid" Nitrogen Liquid Rocket Fuel hydrazine
(99%) pure) Tetroxide Oxygen RP-I (UDMH) Water
HN03 N204 02 Hydrocarbon (CH3)2NNH2 H20
CH1.91
63.016 92.016 32.00 ~ 175 60.10 18.02
231.6 261.95 54.4 225 216 273.15
355.7 294.3 90.0 460-540 336 373.15
480 413b 213 246b 542 225i
(298 K)
0.042 0.374 0.4 0.45 0.672 1.008
(311 K) (290 K) (65 K) (298 K) (298 K) (273.15 K)
0.163 0.447 0.71
(373 K) (360 K) (340 K)
1.549 1.447 1.14 0.58 0.856 1.002
(273.15 K) (293 K) (90.4 K) (422 K) (228 K) (373.15 K)
1.476 1.38 1.23 0.807 0.784 1.00
(313.15 K) (322 K) (77.6 K) (289 K) (244 K) (293.4 K)
1.45 0.47 0.87 0.75 4.4 0.284
(273 K) (293 K) (53.7 K) (289 K) (220 K) (373.15 K)
0.33 0.19 0.21 0.48 1.000
(315 K) (90. 4 K) (366 K) (300 K) (277 K)
0.0027 0.01014 0.0052 0.002 0.0384 0.00689
(273.15 K) (293 K) (88.7 K) (344 K) (289 K) (312 K)
0.605 0.2013 0.023 0.1093 0.03447
(343 K) (328 K) (422 K) (339 K) (345 K)
high flame temperature) but usually a fuel-rich mixture contammg a large
portion of low-molecular-mass reaction products, as shown in Chapter 5.
If very small metallic fuel particles of beryllium or aluminum are suspended
in the liquid fuel, it is theoretically possible to increase the specific impulse by
between 9 and 18%, depending on the particular propellant combination, its
mixture ratio and the metal powder additive. Gelled propellants with sus
pended solid particles have been tested successfully with storable fuels. For
gelled propellants, see Section 7 .5.
The chemical propellant combination that has the highest potential specific
impulse (approximately 480 sec at 1000 psia chamber pressure and expansion
to sea level atmosphere, and 565 sec in a vacuum with a nozzle area ratio of 50)
uses a toxic liquid fluorine oxidizer with hydrogen fuel plus suspended toxic
solid particles of beryllium; as yet a practical means for storing these propel
lants and a practical rocket engine have not been developed.
Vapor pressure, atm
.....
.....
0
0 0-
_ I I I I I
Liquid hydrogen 0
-400
I
L
-300
iquid fluorine -.....
0
0
Liquid methane Liquid oxy -
-200 - gen
-
\/- -100 - - " 0
0
' ' 3" '
i :: , "" ." ," ." .'" t- ~nia c §(1l 1) .
~~ E0Cl) . +100 0 ,_ R_8 . P --7 1- % __, 0. . ._ .h r ...yt _: d -: ,: o : g:: e~ n ~ Pe" - r" o X1.t d! eIV ia ~ r t i-t : --i =S - -o : .. :. .O . :c =:: :: / r.i ..-n . -... -:e . - .. .. ~ ~..: ... ~ ... ~ ~ ~Nitric a C i. d - ~ 1 ..- .- ., . ". ".. '. i-. .. .. ...._ ~ ~ I'--,. ... ,.. I-w 0 0 _ :C ; ,; :;: ;
+ +2 30 00 0 -...:::::::: ~F .u ....r ..t
.
u, Y i;. -. ;. J. c... .o. .. h .. .. 0. .~ ./. ~
~
~ ..._~ ~
\
,.~ . ._ i .- .., .: _. ,: rr.: .,..! -;- ;
I
- - i.. .. .. .. .. . ._. .. · ~ ,M §e it lh Iy ;1 -
~
~ l ~c oho/
>-,
I-~ 0 0
+400 ~ ~1V1tro1r7 (/!{ii<tne ~ ~ tr-~-.. -
~ e j j :,.: Co;/' I:> I'- ( 0 0J l
+500
FIGURE 7-2. Vapor pressures of several liquid propellants as a function of temperature.
7.1. PROPELLANT PROPERTIES 247
Common Physical Hazards
Although the several categories of hazards are described below, they do not all
apply to every propellant. The hazards are different for each specific propellant
and must be carefully understood before working with that propellant. The
consequences of unsafe operation or unsafe design are usually also unique to
several propellants.
Corrosion. Various propellants, such as nitrogen tetroxide or hydrogen per
oxide, have to be handled in containers and pipelines of special materials. If the
propellant were permitted to become contaminated with corrosion products, its
physical and chemical properties could change sufficiently to make it unsuita
ble for rocket operation. The corrosion of the gaseous reaction products is
important in applications in which the reaction products are likely to damage
structure and parts of the vehicle or affect communities and housing near a test
facility or launch site.
Explosion Hazard. Some propellants, such as hydrogen peroxide and nitro
methane, are unstable and tend to detonate under certain conditions of impu
rities, temperature, and shock. If liquid oxidizers (e.g., liquid oxygen) and fuels
are mixed together they can be detonated. Unusual, rare flight vehicle launch
or transport accidents have caused such mixing to occur (see Refs. 7-2 and
7-3).
Fire Hazard. Many oxidizers will start chemical reactions with a large variety
of organic compounds. Nitric acid, nitrogen tetroxide, fluorine, or hydrogen
peroxide react spontaneously with many organic substances. Most of the fuels
are readily ignitable when exposed to air and heat.
Accidental Spills. Unforeseen mishaps during engine operation and traffic
accidents on highways or railroads while transporting hazardous materials,
including propellants, have on occasion caused spills, which expose people to
unexpected fires, or potential health hazards. The U.S. Department of Trans
portation has rules for marking and containing hazardous materials during
transport and also guidelines for emergency action (see Ref. 7--4).
Health Hazards. Many propellants are toxic or poisonous, and special pre
cautions have to be taken to protect personnel. Fluorine, for example, is very
poisonous. Toxic propellant chemicals or poisonous exhaust species can enter
the human body in several ways. The resulting health disorders are propellant
specific. Nitric acid can cause severe skin burn and tissue disintegration. Skin
contact with aniline or hydrazine can cause nausea and other adverse health
effects. Hydrazine and its derivatives, such as dimethylhydrazine or hydrazine
hydrate, are known carcinogens (cancer-causing substances). Many propellant
248 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
vapors cause eye irritation, even in very small concentration. Inadvertent swal
lowing of many propellants can also cause severe health degradation.
The inhalation of certain toxic exhaust gases or gaseous or vaporized pro
pellants is perhaps the most common health hazard. It can cause severe damage
if the exposure is for long duration or in concentrations that exceed established
maximum threshold values. In the United States the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) has established limits or thresholds on the
allowable exposure and concentration for most propellant chemicals. Several
of these propellant gas threshold limits are mentioned later in this chapter.
Toxic gases in the exhaust could include hydrofluoric acid (HF) gas; its OSHA
8-hr personnel exposure limit is 3 ppm (volumetric parts per million) and its
short-term (typically, 15 min) exposure limit is 6 ppm. A concentration of 3000
ppm or 0.3% can be fatal within a few seconds. Pentaborane, which is very
toxic and has been used in experimental engines, has an 8-hr personnel expo
sure limit at a threshold of 0.005 ppm. References 7-2 and 7-5 give more
information on toxic effects.
The corrosion, explosion, and fire hazards of many propellants put severe
limitations on the materials, the handling, and the design of rocket-propelled
vehicles and their engine compartments. Not only is the rocket system itself
exposed to the hazardous propellant, but adjacent personnel, structural parts,
electrical and other vehicle equipment, and test and launch facilities have to be
properly protected against the effects of possible leaks, fumes, and fires or
explosions from propellant accumulations.
Material Compatibility. Many liquid propellants have only a limited number
of truly compatible materials, both metals and nonmetals, such as gaskets or
0-rings. There have been unfortunate failures (causing fires, leakage, corro
sion, or malfunctions) when an improper or incompatible material was used in
the hardware of a rocket engine. Depending on the specific component and
loading conditions, these structural materials have to withstand high stresses,
stress corrosion, high temperatures, or abrasion. Several specific material lim
itations are mentioned in the next section. Certain materials catalyze a self
decomposition of stored hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen, making
long-term storage difficult and, if confined, causing its container to explode.
Many structural materials, when exposed to cold, cryogenic propellants, can
become very brittle.
Desirable Physical Properties
Low Freezing Point. This permits operation of rockets in cold weather. The
addition of small amounts of special chemicals has been found to help depress
the freezing point of some liquid propellants which solidify readily at relatively
high temperature.
7.1. PROPELLANT PROPERTIES 249
High Specific Gravity. In order to accommodate a large mass of propellants
in a given vehicle tank space, a dense propellant is required. It permits a small
vehicle construction and, consequently, a relatively low structural vehicle mass
and low aerodynamic drag. Specific gravity, therefore, has an important effect
on the maximum flight velocity and range of any rocket-powered vehicle or
missile flying within the earth's atmosphere, as explained in Chapter 4. Specific
gravities for various propellants are plotted in Fig. 7-1. A variation of the
temperature of stored propellant will cause change in liquid level in the tank.
For any given mixture ratio r, the average specific gravity of a propellant
combination Dav can be determined from the specific gravities of the fuel 8 and
1
of the oxidizer 8 The average specific gravity is defined as the mass of the fuel
0•
and oxidizer, divided by the sum of their volumes. Here the mixture ratio is
defined as the oxidizer mass flow rate divided by the fuel mass flow rate.
(7-1)
Values of Dav for various propellant combinations are listed in Table 5-5. The
value of Dav can be increased by adding heavy materials to the propellants,
either by solution or colloidal suspension. The identical type of equation can be
written for the average density Pav in terms of the fuel density and the oxidizer
density.
+
PoPJ(I r)
Pav= (7-2)
+
PJr Po
In the SI system of units the specific gravity has the same numerical value as the
density expressed in units of grams per cubic centimeter or kg/liter. In some
performance comparisons the parameter density specific impulse Id is used. It is
defined as the product of the average specific gravity 8 and the specific impulse
Is:
(7-3)
Stability. No deterioration and no decomposition with long-term (over 15
years) storage and minimal reaction with the atmosphere have been attained
with many propellants. Good chemical stability means no decomposition of the
liquid propellant during operation or storage, even at elevated temperature. A
good liquid propellant should also have no chemical deterioration when in
contact with piping, tank walls, valve seats, and gasket materials, even at
relatively high ambient temperatures. No appreciable absorption of moisture
and no adverse effects of small amounts of impurities are desirable properties.
There should be no chemical deterioration when liquid flows through the hot
cooling jacket passages. Some hydrocarbons (e.g., olefins) decompose and
250 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
form carbonaceous deposits on the hot inside surfaces of the cooling passage.
These deposits can be hard, reduce the heat flow, increase the local metal
temperatures, and thus can cause the metal to weaken and fail. About I%
per year of stored concentrated hydrogen peroxide decomposes in clean storage
tanks. Between I and 20% of a cryogenic propellant (stored in a vehicle)
evaporates every day in an insulated tank.
Heat Transfer Properties. High specific heat, high thermal conductivity, and a
high boiling or decomposition temperature are desirable for propellants that are
used for thrust chamber cooling (see Section 8.3).
Pumping Properties. A low vapor pressure permits not only easier handling
of the propellants, but also a more effective pump design in applications where
the propellant is pumped. This reduces the potential for cavitation, as ex
plained in Chapter 10. If the viscosity of the propellant is too high, then
pumping and engine-system calibration become difficult. Propellants with high
vapor pressure, such as liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen, and other liquefied
gases, require special design provisions, unusual handling techniques, and spe
cial low-temperature materials.
Temperature Variation. The temperature variation of the physical properties
of the liquid propellant should be small. For example, a wide temperature
variation in vapor pressure and density (thermal coefficient of expansion) or
an unduly high change in viscosity with temperature makes it very difficult to
accurately calibrate a rocket engine flow system or predict its performance over
any reasonable range of operating temperatures.
Ignition, Combustion, and Flame Properties
If the propellant combination is spontaneously ignitable, it does not require an
ignition system. This means that burning is initiated as the oxidizer and the fuel
come in contact with each other. Spontaneously ignitable propellants are often
termed hypergolic propellants. Although an ignition system is not a very objec
tionable feature, its elimination is usually desirable because it simplifies the
propulsion system. All rocket propellants should be readily ignitable and
have a small ignition time delay in order to reduce the potential explosion
hazard during starting. Starting and ignition problems are discussed further
in Section 8.4.
Nonspontaneously ignitable propellants have to be heated by external means
before ignition can begin. lgniters are devices that accomplish an initial slight
pressurization of the chamber and the initial heating of the propellant mixture
to the point where steady flow combustion can be self-sustained. The amount
of energy added by the igniter to activate the propellants should be small so
that low-power ignition systems can be used. The energy required for satisfac-
7.2. LIQUID OXIDIZERS 251
tory ignition usually diminishes for increasing ambient temperature of the
propellant.
Certain propellant combinations burn very smoothly without combustion
vibration. Other propellant combinations do not demonstrate this combustion
stability and, therefore, are less desirable. Combustion is treated in Chapter 9.
Smoke formation is objectionable in many applications because of the
smoke deposits on the surrounding equipment and parts. Smoke and brilliantly
luminous exhaust flames are objectionable in certain military applications,
because they can be easily detected. In some applications the condensed species
in the exhaust gas can cause surface contamination on spacecraft windows or
optical lenses and the electrons in the flame can cause undesirable interference
or attenuation of communications radio signals. See Chapter 18 for information
on exhaust plumes.
Property Variations and Specifications
The propellant properties and quality must not vary, because this can affect
engine performance, combustion, and physical or chemical properties. The
same propellant must have the same composition, properties, and storage or
rocket operating characteristics if manufactured at different times or if made
by different manufacturers. For these reasons propellants are purchased
against specifications which define ingredients, maximum allowable impurities,
packaging methods or compatible materials, allowable tolerances on physical
properties (such as density, boiling point, freezing point, viscosity, or vapor
pressure), quality control requirements, cleaning procedures for containers,
documentation of inspections, laboratory analyses, or test results. A careful
chemical analysis of the composition aand impurities is necessary. Reference 7-
6 describes some of these methods of analysis.
Additive
Altering and tailoring propellant properties can be achieved with additives. For
example, to make a non-hypergolic fuel become hypergolic (readily ignited), a
reactive ingredient has been added. To desensitize concentrated hydrogen per
oxide and reduce self-decomposition, it is diluted with 3 to I 5% water. To
increase density or to alleviate certain combustion instabilities, a fine powder of
a heavy solid material can be suspended in the propellant.
7.2. LIQUID OXIDIZERS
Many different types of storable and cryogenic liquid oxidizer propellants have
been used, synthesized, or proposed. For high specific impulse this includes
boron-oxygen-fluorine compounds, oxygen-fluorine compounds, nitrogen
fluorine formulations, and fluorinated hydrocarbons; however, they all have
252 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
some undesirable characteristics and these synthetic oxidizers have not been
proven to be practical. Oxidizer liquids that have been used in experimental
liquid rocket engines include mixtures of liquid oxygen and liquid fluorine,
oxygen difluoride (OF 2), chlorine trifluoride (CIF 3), or chlorine pentafluoride
(CIF 5). All of these are highly toxic and very corrosive. Several commonly used
oxidizers are listed below.
Liquid Oxygen (02)
Liquid oxygen, often abbreviated as LOX, boils at 90 K at atmospheric pres
sure; at these conditions it has a specific gravity of 1.14 and a heat of vapor
ization of 213 kJ /kg. It is widely used as an oxidizer and burns with a bright
white-yellow flame with most hydrocarbon fuels. It has been used in combina
tion with alcohols, jet fuels (kerosene-type), gasoline, and hydrogen. As shown
in Table 5-5, the attainable performance is relatively high, and liquid oxygen is
therefore a desirable and commonly used propellant in large rocket engines.
The following missiles and space launch vehicles use oxygen: (I) with jet fuel
Atlas, Thor, Jupiter, Titan I, Saturn booster; (2) with hydrogen-Space Shuttle
and Centaur upper stage; (3) with alcohol-V-2 and Redstone. Figures 1-4 and
6-1 show units that use oxygen. Figures 5-1 to 5-6 give theoretical perfor
mance data for liquid oxygen with a kerosene-type fuel.
Although it usually does not burn spontaneously with organic materials at
ambient pressures, combustion or explosions can occur when a confined mix
ture of oxygen and organic matter is suddenly pressurized. Impact tests show
that mixtures of liquid oxygen with many commercial oils or organic materials
will detonate. Liquid oxygen supports and accelerates the combustion of other
materials. Handling and storage are safe when contact materials are clean.
Liquid oxygen is a noncorrosive and nontoxic liquid and will not cause the
deterioration of clean container walls. When in prolonged contact with human
skin, the cryogenic propellant causes severe burns. Because liquid oxygen eva
porates rapidly, it cannot be stored readily for any great length of time. If
liquid oxygen is used in large quantities, it is often produced very close to its
geographical point of application. Liquid oxygen can be obtained in several
ways, such as by boiling liquid nitrogen out of liquid air.
It is necessary to insulate all lines, tanks, valves, and so on, that contain
liquid oxygen in order to reduce the evaporation loss. Rocket propulsion sys
tems which remain filled with liquid oxygen for several hours and liquid oxygen
storage systems have to be well insulated against absorbing heat from the
surroundings. External drainage provisions have to be made on all liquid
oxygen tanks and lines to eliminate the water that condenses on the walls.
Example 7-1. Estimate the approximate temperature and volume change of liquid
oxygen if an oxygen tank is pressurized to 8.0 atmospheres for a long time before engine
start. Assume the tank is 60% full and the evaporated oxygen is refrigerated and
recondensed (constant mass).
7.2. LIQUID OXIDIZERS 253
SOLUTION. Using Table 7-1 and Figs. 7-1 and 7-2, the vapor pressure goes from 1.0
atm (0.1 MPa) to 8 atm (about 0.8 MPa) and the equilibrium temperature goes from the
boiling point of 90 Kat 1.0 atm to about 133 K. The corresponding specific gravities are
1.14 and 0.88 respectively. This is an increase of 1.14/0.88 = 1.29 or about 77% full
(29% more volume).
In tanks with turbopump feed systems the actual tank pressures are lower (typically 2
to 4 atm) and the evaporated oxygen is vented, causing a cooling effect on the liquid
surface. So the numbers calculated above are too large (8 atm was selected to clearly
show the effect). The warming occurs when there is a long hold period of a pressurized
cryogenic propellant tank and is most pronounced when the final portion of the pro
pellant is being emptied. Nevertheless the higher temperature, higher vapor pressure,
and lower density can cause changes in mixture ratio, required tank volume, and pump
suction condition (see Section I 0.1 ). Therefore tanks with cryogenic propellant are
insulated (to minimize heat transfer and density changes) and are pressurized only
shortly before engine start, so as to keep the propellant at its lowest possible
temperature.
Hydrogen Peroxide (H 20 2)
In rocket application, hydrogen peroxide has been used in a highly concen
trated form of 70 to 99%; the remainder is mostly water. Commercial peroxide
is approximately 30% concentrated. Concentrated hydrogen peroxide was used
in gas generator and rocket applications between 1938 and 1965 (X-1 and X-
15 research aircraft).
In the combustion chamber, the propellant decomposes according to the
following chemical reaction, forming superheated steam and gaseous oxygen:
This decomposition is brought about by the action of catalysts such as various
liquid permanganates, solid manganese dioxide, platinum, and iron oxide. In
fact, most impurities act as a catalyst. H 0 is hypergolic with hydrazine and
2 2
will burn well with kerosene. The theoretical specific impulse of 90% hydrogen
peroxide is 154 sec, when used as a monopropellant with a solid catalyst bed.
Even under favorable conditions H 0 will often decompose at a slow rate
2 2
during storage, about one percent per year for 95%, and gas will bubble out of
the liquid. Contaminated liquid peroxide must be disposed of before it reaches
a danger point of about 448 K, when an explosion usually occurs.
Concentrated peroxide causes severe burns when in contact with human skin
and may ignite and cause fires when in contact with wood, oils, and many other
organic materials. In the past rocket engines with hydrogen peroxide oxidizer
have been used for aircraft boost (German Me 163, and U.S. F 104) and a
missile (Britain: Black Knight). It has not been used for a long time, partly
because of its long-term storage stability. However, there has been some
improvement and some renewed interest in this dense oxidizer, which produces
a nontoxic exhaust.
254 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
Nitric Acid (HN0 3)
There are several types of nitric acid mixtures that have been used as oxidizers
between 1940 and 1965; they are not used extensively today in the United
States. The most common type, red fuming nitric acid (RFNA), consists of
concentrated nitric acid (HN0 3) that contains between 5 and 20% dissolved
nitrogen dioxide. The evaporating red-brown fumes are exceedingly annoying
and poisonous. Compared to concentrated nitric acid (also called white fuming
nitric acid), RFNA is more energetic, more stable in storage, and less corrosive
to many tank materials.
Nitric acid is highly corrosive. Only certain types of stainless steel, gold, and
a few other materials are satisfactory as storage containers or pipeline materi
als. A small addition of fluorine ion (less than 1% of HF) inhibits the nitric
acid, causes a fluoride layer to form on the wall, and greatly reduces the
corrosion with many metals. It is called inhibited red fuming nitric acid
(IRFNA). In case of accident of spilling, the acid should be diluted with
water or chemically deactivated. Lime and alkali metal hydroxides and carbo
nates are common neutralizing agents. However, nitrates formed by the neu
tralization are also oxidizing agents and must be handled accordingly.
Nitric acid has been used with gasoline, various amines, hydrazine,
dimethylhydrazine, and alcohols. It ignites spontaneously with hydrazine, fur
furyl alcohol, aniline, and other amines. The specific gravity of nitric acid
varies from 1.5 to 1.6, depending on the percentages of nitric oxide, water,
and impurities. This high density permits compact vehicle construction.
Vapors from nitric acid or red fuming nitric acid have an OSHA 8-hr
personnel exposure limit or a threshold work allowance of 2 ppm (parts per
million or about 5 mg/m3 ) and a short-term exposure limit of 10 ppm. Droplets
on the skin cause burns and sores which do not heal readily.
Nitrogen Tetroxide (N 20 4)
This is a high-density yellow-brown liquid (specific gravity of 1.44). Although it
is the most common storable oxidizer used in the United States today, its liquid
temperature range is narrow and it is easily frozen or vaporized. It is only
mildly corrosive when pure, but forms strong acids when moist or allowed
to mix with water. It readily absorbs moisture from the air. It can be stored
indefinitely in sealed containers made of compatible material. It is hypergolic
with many fuels and can cause spontaneous ignition with many common
materials, such as paper, leather, and wood. The fumes are reddish brown
and are extremely toxic. Because of its high vapor pressure it must be kept
in relatively heavy tanks. The freezing point of N 0 can be lowered (by
2 4
adding a small amount of nitric oxide or NO) but at the penalty of a higher
vapor pressure. This mixture of NO and N 0 is called mixed oxides of nitro
2 4
gen (MON) and different grades have been 2 and 30% NO content.
7.3. LIQUID FUELS 255
Nitrogen tetroxide is a storable propellant oxidizer and is used in the Titan
missile together with a fuel mixture consisting of hydrazine and unsymmetrical
dimethylhydrazine. It is also used with monomethylhydrazine fuel in the Space
Shuttle orbital maneuver system and reaction control system and in many
spacecraft propulsion systems. In many of these applications care must be
taken to avoid freezing this propellant. The OSHA 8-hr personnel exposure
limit is 5 ppm or 9 mg/m3 .
7.3. LIQUID FUELS
Again, many different chemicals have been proposed, investigated, and tested.
Only a few have been used in production rocket engines. Liquid fuels other
than those listed below have been used in experimental rocket engines, in older
experimental designs, and in some older production engines. These include
aniline, furfuryl alcohcol, xylidine, gasoline, hydrazine hydrate, borohydrides,
methyl and/or ethyl alcohol, ammonia, and mixtures of some of these with one
or more other fuels.
Hydrocarbon Fuels
Petroleum derivatives encompass a large variety of different hydrocarbon che
micals, most of which can be used as a rocket fuel. Most common are those
types that are in use with other applications and engines, such as gasoline,
kerosene, diesel oil, and turbojet fuel. Their physical properties and chemical
composition vary widely with the type of crude oil from which they were
refined, with the chemical process used in their production, and with the accu
racy of control exercised in their manufacture. Typical values are listed in
Table 7-2.
In general, these petroleum fuels form yellow-white, brilliantly radiating
flames and give good preformance. They are relatively easy to handle, and
there is an ample supply of these fuels available at low cost. A specifically
refined petroleum product particularly suitable as a rocket propellant has
been designated RP-I. It is basically a kerosene-like mixture of saturated
and unsaturated hydrocarbons with a somewhat narrow range of densities
and vapor pressure. Several hydrocarbon fuels can form carbon deposits on
the inside of cooling passages, impeding the heat transfer and raising wall
temperatures. Ref. 7-7 indicates that this carbon formation depends on fuel
temperature in the cooling jacket, the particular fuel, the heat transfer, and the
chamber wall material. RP-I is low in olefins and aromatics, which can cause
carbonaceous deposits inside fuel cooling passages. RP-I has been used with
liquid oxygen in the Atlas, Thor, Delta, Titan I, and Saturn rocket engines (see
Figs. 5-1 to 5-6).
Methane (CH 4) is a cryogenic hydrocarbon fuel. It is denser than liquid
hydrogen and relatively low in cost. Compared to petroleum refined hydro-
256 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
TABLE 7-2. Properties of Some Typical Hydrocarbon Fuels Made from Petroleum
Aviation
Gasoline Diesel
Jet Fuel Kerosene 100/130 Fuel RP-I
Specific gravity at 289 K 0.78 0.81 0.73 0.85 0.80-0.815
Freezing point (K) 213 (max.) 230 213 250 239 (max.)
Viscosity at 289 K 1.4 1.6 0.5 2.0 16.5 (at 239 K)
(cP)
Flash point (K) (TCC) 269 331 244 333 316
ASTM distillation (K)
10% evaporated 347 337 458-483
50% evaporated 444 363
90% evaporated 511 391 617
Reid vapor pressure (psia) 2 to 3 Below I 7 0.1
Specific heat (cal/kg-K) 0.50 0.49 0.53 0.47 0.50
Average molecular mass 130 175 90
(kg/mo!)
carbons it has highly reproducible properties. With liquid oxygen it is a candi
date propellant combination for launch vehicle booster rocket engines and also
reaction engines control when oxygen is available from the main engines).
Experimental oxygen-methane engines have been tested, but they have not
yet flown.
Liquid Hydrogen (H2)
Liquid hydrogen, when burned with liquid fluorine or liquid oxygen, gives a
high performance, as shown in Table 5-5. It also is an excellent regenerative
coolant. With oxygen it burns with a colorless flame; however, the shock waves
in the plume may be visible. Of all known fuels, liquid hydrogen is the lightest
and the coldest, having a specific gravity of0.07 and a boiling point of about 20
K. The very low fuel density requires bulky fuel tanks, which necessitate very
large vehicle volumes. The extremely low temperature makes the problem of
choosing suitable tank and piping materials difficult, because many metals
become brittle at low temperatures.
Because of its low temperature, liquid hydrogen tanks and lines have to be
well insulated to minimize the evaporation of hydrogen or the condensation of
moisture or air on the outside with the subsequent formation of liquid or solid
air or ice. A vacuum jacket often has been used in addition to insulating
materials. All common liquids and gases solidify in liquid hydrogen. These
solid particles in turn plug orifices and valves. Therefore, care must be taken
to scavenge all lines and tanks of air and moisture (flush with helium or pull
7.3. LIQUID FUELS 257
vacuum) before introducing the propellant. Mixture of liquid hydrogen and
solid oxygen or solid air can be explosive.
Liquid hydrogen has two species, namely, orthohydrogen and parahydro
gen, which differ in their nuclear spin state. As hydrogen is liquefied, the
relative equilibrium composition of ortho- and parahydrogen changes. The
transformation from one species to another is accompanied by a transfer of
energy. Liquid hydrogen is manufactured from gaseous hydrogen by successive
compression, cooling, and expansion processes.
Hydrogen gas, when mixed with air, is highly flammable and explosive over
a wide range of mixture ratios. To avoid this danger, hydrogen gas leakage (a
tank vent line) is often intentionally ignited and burned in the air. Liquid
hydrogen is used with liquid oxygen in the Centaur upper stage, the Space
Shuttle main engine, and upper stage space engines developed in Japan,
Russia, Europe, and China.
Hydrogen burning with oxygen forms a nontoxic exhaust gas. This propel
lant combination has been applied successfully to space launch vehicles
because of its high specific impulse. Here the payload capability usually
increases greatly for relatively small increases in specific impulse. However,
the low density of hydrogen makes for a large vehicle and a relatively high
drag.
One method to increase the density of hydrogen is to use a subcooled
mixture of liquid hydrogen and suspended frozen small particles of solid
hydrogen, which is denser than the liquid. Experiments and studies on this
"slush" hydrogen have been performed; it is difficult to produce and maintain
a uniform mixture. It has not yet been used in a flight vehicle.
Some studies have shown that, when burned with liquid oxygen, a hydro
carbon (such as methane or RP-I) can give a small advantage in space launch
vehicle first stages. Here the higher average propellant density allows a smaller
vehicle with lower drag, which compensates for the lower specific impulse of
the hydrocarbon when compared to a hydrogen fuel. Also, there are some
concepts for operating the booster-stage rocket engine initially with hydrocar
bon fuel and then switching during flight to hydrogen fuel. As yet, engines
using two fuels, namely methane (or hydrocarbon) and hydrogen, have not yet
been fully developed or flown. Some work on an experimental engine was done
in Russia.
Hydrazine (N H4)
2
Reference 7-8 gives a good discussion of this propellant, which is used as a
bipropellant fuel as well as a monopropellant. Hydrazine and its related liquid
organic compounds, monomethylhydrazine (MMH) and unsymmetrical
dimethylhydrazine (UDMH), all have similar physical and thermochemical
properties. Hydrazine is a toxic, colorless liquid with a high freezing point
(274.3 K). Hydrazine has a short ignition delay and is spontaneously ignitable
with nitric acid and nitrogen tetroxide.
258 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
Its vapors may form explosive mixtures with air. If hydrazine is spilled on a
surface or a cloth, a spontaneous ignition with air can occur.
Pure anhydrous hydrazine is a stable liquid; it has been safely heated above
530 K. It has been stored in sealed tanks for over 15 years. With impurities or
at higher temperatures it decomposes and releases energy. Under pressure
shock (blast wave) it decomposes at temperatures as low as 367 K. Under
some conditions this decomposition can be a violent detonation, and this has
caused problems in cooling passages of experimental injectors and thrust
chambers. Harmful effects to personnel may result from ingestion, inhalation
of vapors, or prolonged contact with skin. The OSHA 8-hr personnel exposure
limit is 0.1 ppm or 0.13 mg/m3 . Hydrazine is a known carcinogen.
Hydrazine reacts with many materials, and care must be exercised to avoid
storage contact with materials that cause a decomposition (see Ref 7-9).
Tanks, pipes, or valves must be cleaned and free of impurities. Compatible
materials include stainless steels (303, 304, 321, or 347), nickel, and 1100 and
3003 series of aluminum. Iron, copper and its alloys (such as brass or bronze),
monel, magnesium, zinc, and some types of aluminum alloy must be avoided.
Unsymmetrical Dimethylhydrazine [(CH 3)2NNH 2]
A derivative of hydrazine, namely, unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine
(UDMH), is often used instead of or in mixtures with hydrazine because it
forms a more stable liquid, particularly at higher temperatures. Furthermore, it
has a lower freezing point (215.9 K) and a higher boiling point (336.5 K) than a
hydrazine. When UDMH is burned with an oxidizer it gives only slightly lower
values of ls than pure hydrazine. UDMH is often used when mixed with 30 to
50% hydrazine. This fuel is used in the Titan missile and launch vehicle and
spacecraft engines in 50% mixtures and has been used in the lunar landing and
take-off engines. UDMH is used in Russian and Chinese rocket engines.
Freezing does not affect UDMH, MMH, or hydrazine, but freezing of a
50:50 mixture of UDMH and hydrazine causes a separation into two distinct
layers; a special remixing operation is necessary for reblending if freezing
occurs in a space vehicle. The OSHA 8-hr personnel exposure limit for
vapor is 0.5 ppm, and UDMH is a carcinogen.
Monomethylhydrazine (CH 3NHNH 2)
Monomethylhydrazine (MMH) has been used extensively as a fuel in space
craft rocket engines, particularly in small attitude control engines, usually with
N 0 as the oxidizer. It has a better shock resistance to blast waves, better heat
2 4
transfer properties, and a better liquid temperature range than pure hydrazine.
Like hydrazine, its vapors are easily ignited in air; the flammability limits are
from 2.5 to 98% by volume at atmospheric sea level pressure and ambient
temperature. The materials compatible with hydrazine are also compatible
7.4. LIQUID MONOPROPELLANTS 259
with MMH. The specific impulse with storable oxidizers usually is 1 or 2%
lower with MMH than with N 2H 4.
Both MMH an UDMH are soluble in many hydrocarbons; hydrazine is not.
All hydrazines are toxic materials, but MMH is the most toxic when inhaled,
and UDMH the least toxic. Atmospheric concentrations of all hydrazines
should be kept below 0.1 ppm for long periods of exposure.
Monomethylhydrazine, when added in relatively small quantities of 3 to
15% to hydrazine, has a substantial quenching effect on the explosive decom
position of hydrazine. Monomethylhydrazine decomposes at 491 K, whereas
hydrazine explodes at 369 K when subjected to pressure shocks of identical
intensity. MMH is a suspected carcinogen and the OSHA personnel 8-hour
exposure limit is 0.2 ppm.
7.4. LIQUID MONOPROPELLANTS
The propellant-feed and control-system simplicity associated with a monopro
pellant makes this type of propellant attractive for certain applications.
Hydrazine is being used extensively as a monopropellant in small attitude
and trajectory control rockets for the control of satellites and other spacecraft
and also as a hot gas generator. (It is discussed in the preceding section.) Other
monopropellants (ethylene oxide or nitromethane) were tried experimentally,
but are no longer used today. Concentrated hydrogen peroxide was used for
monopropellant gas generation in the USA, Russia, and Germany in engines
designed before 1955.
Ignition of monopropellants can be produced thermally (electrical or flame
heat) or by a catalytic material. A monopropellant must be chemically and
thermally stable to insure good liquid storage properties, and yet it must be
easily decomposed and reactive to give good combustion properties.
Hydrazine as a Monopropellant
Hydrazine is not only an excellent storable fuel, but also an excellent mono
propellant when decomposed by a suitable solid or liquid catalyst; this catalyst
often needs to be preheated for fast startup. Iridium is an effective catalyst at
room temperature. At elevated temperature (about 450 K) many materials
decompose hydrazine, including iron, nickel, and cobalt. See Ref. 7-8.
Different catalysts and different reaction volumes make the decomposition
reaction go to different products, resulting in gases varying in composition
or temperature. As a monopropellant, it is used in gas generators or in space
engine attitude control rockets.
Hydrazine has been stored in sealed tanks for over 15 years. A typical
hydrazine monopropellant thrust chamber, its injection pattern, and its decom
position reaction are described in Chapter 10 and typical design parameters are
shown in Fig. 7-3 and a monopropellant structure in Fig. 8-16.
260 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
0 20 40 60 80 100
....... 2500
1600 "'
"'
1400 " - 2000 ;'-
fl:-
~ ::::,
1200 Ti!
8.
~ - E
1500 Cl)
f-
1000
"'
900
"
:::n
FfiJ::
1250
1200
m==II = ==±==Eb===~
'.~Ef4J:
J
I
cf!. so~~-,-~~--.-~~--.--~~.-~--,
0
E 60r--~"'--<t:--~--tc:-:--~--+-------::=----t-~--1
:Ce:
40r--~--t~-----"'-...ia...-"-------+-~~+
" 0a ' . 20t--"=--=':.oo+£:....~-+~---=="'!-~~+---
E
0
(.) 0 20 40 60 80 100
Ammonia decomposition, %
FIGURE 7-3. Operating parameters for decomposed hydrazine at the exit of a catalytic
reactor as a function of the ammonia dissociation fraction. Adapted with permission
from Ref. 7-8.
The catalytic decomposition of hydrazine can be described ideally as a two
step process; this ignores other steps and intermediate products. First, hydra
zine (N 2H 4) decomposes into gaseous ammonia (NH 3) and nitrogen (N 2); this
reaction is highly exothermic, i.e., it releases heat. Secondly, the ammonia
decomposes further into nitrogen and hydrogen gases, but this reaction is
endothermic and absorbs heat. These simplified reactions can be written as
(7-4)
Here x is the degree of ammonia dissociation; it is a function of the catalyst
type, size, and geometry, the chamber pressure, and the dwell time within the
7.5. GELLED PROPELLANTS 261
catalyst bed. Figure 7-3 shows several ideal rocket engine parameters for
hydrazine monopropellant as a function of x, the fraction of ammonia that
is decomposed. The values are for an ideal thruster at 1000 psia chamber
pressure with an area ratio of 50 expanding at high altitude. The best specific
impulse is attained when little ammonia is allowed to dissociate.
Hydrazine is manufactured in several grades of purity. The standard com
mercial hydrazine has about 1.5% maximum by weight of water, less than
1.0% aniline, and no more than IO mg/I of particulates, including carbon.
Monopropellant-grade hydrazine has less than I% water, less than 0.5% ani
line (whch is a material commonly used in the manufacture of hydrazine), and
traces of ammonia, carbon dioxide, chlorides, and iron- or carbon-containing
materials such as UDMH or MMH. Aniline and other organic impurities can
poison the catalyst used to decompose monopropellant hydrazine; as men
tioned in Chapter 10, this can cause operating problems. There is also a highly
purified grade of hydrazine that has less water, less than 0.005% aniline, and
less than 0.003% carbon materials; it does not contaminate the catalyst and is
used now in many monopropellant applications.
Hydroxyl Ammonium Nitrate (NH 20WN0 3)
This is a relatively new, synthetic, propellant material rich in oxygen, but with
combined hydrogen and nitrogen (fuel ingredients), it is abbreviated as HAN.
It is an opaque hygroscopic solid when pure, and a clear colorless odorless
liquid in aqueous solutions. The solid HAN (specific gravity of 1.84) is a
potential solid propellant ingredient and the liquid HAN solution is a potential
monopropellant (a 13 molar solution has a specific gravity of 1.523). Both can
be made to burn smoothly and several catalysts have been effective in obtain
ing controlled decomposition. The boiling point (110 to 145°C) and the freez
ing point (-15 to -44°C) vary with the water content. HAN becomes more
viscous as the percentage of water is reduced. The liquid is corrosive, toxic,
denser than hydrazine monopropellant, and does not seem to be carcinogenic.
The liquid is incompatible with alkali materials, many metals, and other mate
rials. Even with relatively very compatible materials HAN solutions decom
pose slowly in storage; a satisfactory stabilizer has yet to be found. The
monopropellant's specific impulse is between 200 and 265 sec, depending on
the water content and the mixing of the aqueous HAN with one of several
possible compatible organic fuel liquids. The HAN propellant formulation, its
rocket engines, and solid motors are still in their research and development
phase, as shown in Refs. 7-9 and 7-10.
7.5. GELLED PROPELLANTS
Gelled propellants have additives that make them thixotropic materials. They
have the consistency of thick paint or jelly when at rest, but they liquify and
262 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
flow through pipes, valves, pumps, or injectors when an adequate shear stress is
applied. They offer these advantages.
Small aluminum particles can be suspended in the fuels where smoky
exhaust is not objectionable. Inert solid particles can be suspended in
oxidizer liquids. This increases propellant density, density impulse, and
thus reduces the size of tanks and vehicles. Smaller vehicles have reduced
drag and thus can allow an increase in the range or speed of tactical
missiles.
There is no plugging of injector orifices or valve passages and good flow
control has been demonstrated.
Individual gelled fuel propellants will be essentially nonflammable and will
not usually sustain an open fire.
There is reduced susceptibility of leakage or spill, reduced sloshing of liquids
in the tanks, and the boil-off rate is reduced.
Long-term storage without settling or separation is possible; more than 10
years has been demonstrated.
Explosions or detonations, which happen when a vehicle accident causes
liquid propellants to become inadvertently premixed, are much less likely
with gelled propellants, which are difficult to mix.
Many spilled gelled propellants can be diluted with water and disposed of
safely.
Short-duration pulsing is possible.
Most storable oxidizers, a few cryogenic propellants, and most liquid stor
able fuels can be gelled.
Explosions are much less likely when a propellant tank is penetrated by a
bullet or when a missile is exposed to an external fire or a nearby detona
tion.
These are some of the disadvantages:
There is a small decrease in specific impulse due to dilution with a gelling
agent, and less efficient atomization or combustion. For example, the
characteristic velocity c* of oxygen-kerosene propellant is decreased by
4 to 6% when the kerosene is gelled and aluminum is suspended in the
fuel. When both the fuel and a nitric acid oxidizer are gelled, the perfor
mance loss (c*) can be as high as 8%. Clever injector design and the
selection of good gelling agents can reduce this loss.
Loading or unloading of propellants is somewhat more complex.
Residual propellant quantity may be slightly higher, because the thixotropic
fluid layer on the walls of the tanks and pipes may be slightly thicker.
Changes in ambient temperature will cause slight changes in propellant
density and viscosity and therefore also in mixture ratio; this can result
in more leftover or residual propellant and thus in a slight reduction of
7.6. GASEOUS PROPELLANTS 263
available total impulse. This can be minimized by careful selection of
gelling agents so as to match the rheological property changes of oxidizer
and fuel over a particular temperature range.
Suspended metals can make the plume smoky and visible.
Some gelling agents have resulted in unstable gelled propellants; that is, they
separated or underwent chemical reactions.
Experimental rocket engines have shown these gelled propellants to be gen
erally safer than ordinary liquid propellants and to have good performance and
operational characteristics (see Refs 7-11 and 7-12). This makes them less
susceptible to field accidents. A variety of different organic and inorganic
gelling agents have been explored with a number of different liquid propellants.
Experimental thrust chambers and rocket engine systems have been satis
factorily demonstrated with several gelled propellant combinations. One
experimental engine is shown in Fig. 6-8. As far as is known, no such rocket
engine has yet been put into production or flight operation. An effort is under
way to demonstrate this technology clearly and to qualify a rocket engine with
gelled propellants for an actual flight application.
7.6. GASEOUS PROPELLANTS
Cold gas propellants have been used successfully for reaction control systems
(RCS) for perhaps 50 years. The engine system is simple, consisting of one or
more high-pressure gas tanks, multiple simple metal nozzles (often aluminum
or plastic), an electrical control valve with each nozzle, a pressure regulator,
and provisions for filling and venting the gas. The tank size will be smaller if
the tank pressures are high. Pressures are typically between 300 and I 000 MPa
(about 300 to 10,000 psi). The mass of spherical storage tanks is essentially
independent of pressure if they contain the same mass of gas.
Typical cold gas propellants and some of their properties and characteristics
are listed in Table 7-3. Nitrogen, argon, dry air, krypton and Freon 14 have
been employed in spacecraft RCSs. With high-pressure hydrogen or helium as
cold gas, the specific impulse is much higher, but the densities of these gases are
much lower. This requires a much larger gas storage volume and heavier high
pressure tanks. In most applications the extra inert mass outweighs the advan
tage of better performance. In a few applications the gas (and its storage tank)
are heated electrically or chemically. This improves the specific impulse and
allows a smaller tank, but it also introduces complexity.
The selection of the gas propellant, the storage tanks, and RCS design
depend on many factors, such as volume and mass of the storage tanks, the
maximum thrust and total impulse, the gas density, required maneuvers, duty
cycle, and flight duration. Cold gas systems are used for total impulses of
perhaps 1200 N-sec or 5000 !bf-sec. Higher values usually employ liquid pro
pellants.
264 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
TABLE 7-3. Properties of Gaseous Propellants Used for Auxiliary Propulsion
Theoretical
Molecular Densitya Specific Impulseb
Propellant Mass (lb/ft3 ) k (sec)
Hydrogen 2.0 1.77 1.40 284
Helium 4.0 3.54 1.67 179
Methane 16.0 14.1 1.30 114
Nitrogen 28.0 24.7 1.40 76
Air 28.9 25.5 1.40 74
Argon 39.9 35.3 1.67 57
Krypton 83.8 74.1 1.63 50
a At 5000 psia and 20°C.
bin vacuum with nozzle area ratio of 50: l and initial temperature of 20°C.
If the operation is short (only a few minutes, while the main engine is
running), the gas expansion will be adiabatic (no heat absorption by gas)
and often is analyzed as isentropic (constant stagnation presure). The tempera
ture of the gas will drop (the pressure and specific impulse will also drop) as the
gas is consumed. For long intermittent operations (months or years in space)
the heat from the spacecraft is transfered to the gas and the tank temperature
stays essentially constant; the expansion will be nearly isothermal. An analysis
of gas expansion is given in Section 6.5.
The advantages and disadvantages of cold gas systems are described on
pages 303 and 304.
7.7. SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
To minimize the hazards and potential damage inherent in reactive propellant
materials, it is necessary to be very conscientious about the likely risks and
hazards (see Ref. 7--4). This concerns toxicity, explosiveness, fire or spill dan
ger, and others mentioned in Section 7.1. Before an operator, assembler, main
tenance mechanic, supervisor; or engineer is allowed to transfer or use a
particular propellant, he or she should receive safety training in the particular
propellant, its characteristics, its safe handling or transfer, potential damage to
equipment or the environment, and the countermeasures for limiting the con
sequences in case of an accident. They must also understand the potential
hazards to the health of personnel, first aid, remedies in case of contact expo
sure of the skin, ingestion, or inhaling, and the use of safety equipment.
Examples of safety equipment are protective clothing, detectors for toxic
vapors, remote controls, warning signals, or emergency water deluge. The
personnel working with or being close to highly toxic materials usually have
to undergo frequent health monitoring. Also rocket engines need to be
PROBLEMS 265
designed for safety to minimize the occurrence of a leak, an accidental spill, an
unexpected fire, or other potentially unsafe conditions. Most organizations
have one or more safety specialists who review the safety of the test plans,
manufacturing operations, design, procedures, or safety equipment. With the
proper training, equipment, precautions, and design safety features, all propel
lants can be handled safely.
If a safety violation occurs or if an operation, design, procedure, or practice
is found to be (or appears to be) unsafe, then a thorough investigation of the
particular item or issue should be undertaken, the cause of the lack of safety
should be investigated and identified, and an appropriate remedial action
should be selected and initiated as soon as possible.
The discharge of toxic exhaust gases to the environment and their dispersion
by the wind can cause exposure of operating personnel as well as the people in
nearby areas. This is discussed in Section 20.2. The dumping or spilling of toxic
liquids can contaminate subterranean aquifers and surface waters, and their
vapors can pollute the air. Today the type and amount of gaseous and liquid
discharges are regulated and monitored by government authorities. These dis
charges must be controlled or penalties will be assessed against violators.
Obtaining a permit to discharge can be a lengthy and involved procedure.
PROBLEMS
1. Plot the variation of the density specific impulse (product of average specific gravity
and specific impulse) with mixture ratio and explain the meaning of the curve. Use
the theoretical shifting specific impulse values of Figure 5-1 and the specific gravities
from Figure 7-1 or Table 7-1 for the liquid oxygen-RP-I propellant combination.
Answers: Check point at r = 2.0; Is= 290; Id= 303; Dav= 1.01.
2. Prepare a table comparing the relative merits of liquid oxygen and nitric acid as
rocket oxidizers.
3. Derive Eq. 7-1 for the average specific gravity.
4. A rocket engine uses liquid oxygen and RP-I as propellants at a design mass mixture
ratio of 2.40. The pumps used in the feed system are basically constant-volume flow
devices. The RP-I hydrocarbon fuel has a nominal temperature of 298 Kand it can
vary at about ±25°C. The liquid oxygen is nominally at its boiling point (90 K), but,
after the tank is pressurized, this temperature can increase by 30 K. What are the
extreme mixture ratios under unfavorable temperature conditions? If this engine has
a nominal mass flow rate of 100 kg/sec and a duration of 100 sec, what is the
maximum residual propellant mass when the other propellant is fully consumed?
Use the curve slopes of Fig. 7-1 to estimate changes in density. Assume that the
specific impulse is constant for the relatively small changes in mixture ratio, that
vapor pressure changes have no influence on the pump flow, and that the engine has
no automatic control for mixture ratio.
266 LIQUID PROPELLANTS
5. The vehicle stage propelled by the rocket engine in Problem 4 has a design mass ratio
mJlm of 0.50 (see Eq. 4-6). How much will the worst combined changes in propel
0
lant temperatures effect the mass ratio and the ideal gravity-free vacuum velocity?
6. (a) What should be the approximate percent ullage volume for nitrogen tetroxide
tank when the vehicle is exposed to ambient temperatures between about 50°F
and about l 50°F?
(b) What is maximum tank presure at 150°F.
(c) What factors should be considered in part (b)?
Answers: (a) 15 to 17%; the variation is due to the nonuniform temperature distri
bution in the tank; (b) 6 to 7 atm; (c) vapor pressure, nitrogen monoxide
content in the oxidizer, chemical reactions with wall materials, or impu
rities that result in largely insoluble gas products.
7. An insulated, long vertical, vented liquid oxygen tank has been sitting on the sea level
launch stand for a period of time. The surface of the liquid is at atmospheric pressure
and is I 0.2 m above the closed outlet at the bottom of the tank. If there is no
circulation, what will be the temperature, pressure and density of the oxygen at
the tank outlet?
SYMBOLS
density specific impulse, sec
specific impulse, sec
ratio of specific heat
r mixture ratio (mass flow rate of oxidizer to mass flow rate of
fuel)
Greek Letters
Dav average specific gravity of mixture
81 specific gravity of fuel
80 specific gravity of oxidizer
Pav, PJ, Po densities, kg/m3 (lbm/ft3 )
REFERENCES
7-I. S. F. Sarner, Propellant Chemistry, Reinhold Publishing Company, New York,
1966.
7-2. Chemical Rocket Propellant Hazards, Vol. 1, General Safety Engineering Design
Criteria, Chemical Propulsion Information Agency (CPIA) Publication 194,
October 1971.
7-3. L. C. Sutherland, "Scaling Law for Estimating Liquid Propellant Explosive
Yields," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, March-April 1978, pp. 124-125.
REFERENCES 267
7-4. Hazardous Materials, 1980 Emergency Response Guidebook, DOT-P 5800.2, U.S.
Department of Transportation, Washington, DC, 1980.
7-5. 1990-1991 Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents
and Biological Exposure Indices, American Conference of Government Industrial
Hygienists, Cincinnati, OH, 1990 (revised periodically).
7-6. H. E. Malone, The Analysis of Rocket Propellants, Academic Press, New York,
1976.
7-7. K. Liang, B.Yang, and Z. Zhang, "Investigation of Heat Transfer and Coking
Characteristics of Hydrocarbon Fuels," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 14,
No. 5, September-October 1998.
7-8. E. W. Schmidt, Hydrazine and its Derivatives, Preparation, Properties,
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1984.
7-9. 0. M. Morgan and D. S. Meinhardt, "Monopropellant Selection Criteria
Hydrazine and other Options," AIAA Technical Paper 99-2595, June 1999.
7-10. D. Mittendorf, W. Facinelli, and R. Serpolus, "Experimental Development of a
Monopropellant for Space Propulsion Systems," AIAA Technical Paper 99-2951,
June 1999.
7-11. K. F. Hodge, T. A. Crofoot, and S. Nelson, "Gelled Technical Propellants for
Tactical Missile Application," AIAA Technical Paper 99-2976, June 1999.
7-12. B. D. Allen, "History, Development and Testing of Thixotropic Gels for
Advanced Systems," AIAA Propulsion Conference, July 1985.
CHAPTER 8
THRUST CHAMBERS
The thrust chamber is the key subassembly of a rocket engine. Here the liquid
propellants are metered, injected, atomized, vaporized, mixed, and burned to
form hot reaction gas products, which in turn are accelerated and ejected at
high velocity (see Refs. 6-1 and 6-2). This chapter describes thrust chambers,
their components, cooling, ignition, and heat transfer. A rocket thrust chamber
assembly (Figs. 8-1 and 8-2) has an injector, a combustion chamber, a super
sonic nozzle, and mounting provisions. All have to withstand the extreme heat of
combustion and the various forces, including the transmission of the thrust
force to the vehicle. There also is an ignition system if non-spontaneously
ignitable propellants are used. Some thrust chamber assemblies also have inte
grally mounted propellant valves and sometimes a thrust vector control device,
as described in Chapter 16. Table 8-1 (see pages 272-273) gives various data
about five different thrust chambers with different kinds of propellants, cooling
methods, injectors, feed systems, thrust levels, or nozzle expansions. Some
engine parameters are also listed. Some of the terms used in this table will
be explained later in this chapter.
The basic analyses for thrust chamber performance (specific impulse, com
bustion temperature) are given in Chapter 5, the basic design parameters
(thrust, flow, chamber pressure, or throat area) are in Chapter 3, and the
combustion phenomena in Chapter 9.
Although we use the word thrust chamber in this book (for rocket engines
generally larger than 1000 !bf thrust), some articles use the term thrust cylinder
or rocket combustor. We will also use the term thruster for small thrust units,
such as attitude control thrusters, and for electrical propulsion systems.
268
THRUST CHAMBERS 269
Flow straightener
Injector
plate
Throat stiffening band
Combustion section
(con1ergent)
Hydraulic actuator
pick-up point
Thrust chamber throat
Chamber stitfen in g bands
FIGURE 8-1. Construction of a regeneratively cooled tubular thrust chamber using a
kerosene-type fuel and liquid oxygen, as originally used in the Thor missile. The nozzle
inside diameter is about 15 in. The sea-level thrust was originally 120,000 !bf, but was
uprated to 135,000, then 150,000, and finally to 165,000 !bf by increasing the flow and
chamber pressure and strengthening and modifying the hardware. The cone-shaped exit
cone was replaced by a bell-shaped nozzle. Figure 8-9 shows how the fuel flows down
through every other tube and returns through the adjacent tube before flowing into the
injector. Figure 8-4 shows the flow passages in a similar injector. (Courtesy of Rolls
Royce, England.)
.N... .
0
Stainless steel inner
liner with 120 groove
12 quarter-wave coolant passages and
integral acoustic electroformed nickel
resonator cavities closure
Fuel inlet
43.09 in
I.D.
Platelet type
injector with
impinging stream
pattern---~
Fuel-cooled Fuel-cooled Radiation-cooled
chamber nozzle --T""lf------------ nozzle extension, thin ___________ _
section niobium alloy shell
FIGURE 8-2. Simplified half-section of one of the two thrust chambers of the orbital maneuvering engines used on the Space Shuttle vehicle.
Each develops a vacuum thrust of 6000 !bf (26,689 N) and delivers a minimum vacuum specific impulse of 310 sec, using nitrogen tetroxide and
monomethyl hydrazine propellants at a nominal mixture ratio of 1.65 and a nominal chamber pressure of 128 psia. It is designed for 100 flight
missions, a service life of 10 years, and a minimum of 500 starts. These engines provide the thrust for final orbit attainment, orbit circulariza
tion, orbit transfer, rendezvous, and deorbit maneuvers. The nozzle area ratio of 55: 1. (Courtesy of Aerojet Propulsion Company.)
8.1. INJECTORS 271
8.1. INJECTORS
The functions of the injector are similar to those of a carburetor of an internal
combustion engine. The injector has to introduce and meter the flow of liquid
propellants to the combustion chamber, cause the liquids to be broken up into
small droplets (a process called atomization), and distribute and mix the pro
pellants in such a manner that a correctly proportioned mixture of fuel and
oxidizer will result, with uniform propellant mass flow and composition over
the chamber cross section. This has been accomplished with different types of
injector designs and elements; several common types are shown in Fig. 8-3 and
complete injectors are shown in Figs. 9-6, 8-1, and 8-4.
The injection hole pattern on the face of the injector is closely related to the
internal manifolds or feed passages within the injector. These provide for the
distribution of the propellant from the injector inlet to all the injection holes. A
large complex manifold volume allows low passage velocities and good distri
bution of flow over the cross section of the chamber. A small manifold volume
allows for a lighter weight injector and reduces the amount of "dribble" flow
after the main valves are shut. The higher passage velocities cause a more
uneven flow through different identical injection holes and thus a poorer dis
tribution and wider local gas composition variation. Dribbling results in after
burning, which is an inefficient irregular combustion that gives a little "cutoff'
thrust after valve closing. For applications with very accurate terminal vehicle
velocity requirements, the cutoff impulse has to be very small and reproducible
and often valves are built into the injector to minimize passage volume.
Impinging-stream-type, multiple-hole injectors are commonly used with
oxygen-hydrocarbon and storable propellants. For unlike doublet patterns
the propellants are injected through a number of separate small holes in
such a manner that the fuel and oxidizer streams impinge upon each other.
Impingement forms thin liquid fans and aids atomization of the liquids into
droplets, also aiding distribution. Characteristics of specific injector orifices are
given in Table 8-2 (see page 279). Impinging hole injectors are also used for
like-on-like or self-impinging patterns (fuel-on-fuel and oxidizer-on-oxidizer).
The two liquid streams then form a fan which breaks up into droplets.
Unlike doublets work best when the hole size (more exactly, the volume
flow) of the fuel is about equal to that of the oxidizer and the ignition delay
is long enough to allow the formation of fans. For uneven volume flow the
triplet pattern seems to be more effective.
The nonimpinging or shower head injector employs nonimpinging streams of
propellant usually emerging normal to the face of the injector. It relies on
turbulence and diffusion to achieve mixing. The German World War II V-2
rocket used this type of injector. This type is now not used, because it requires a
large chamber volume for good combustion. Sheet or spray-type injectors give
cylindrical, conical, or other types of spray sheets; these sprays generally inter
sect and thereby promote mixing and atomization. By varying the width of the
sheet (through an axially moveable sleeve) it is possible to throttle the propel-
I...\..).
TABLE 8-1. Thrust Chamber Characteristics
I\)
Engine Designation
RL IOB-2 LE-7 (Japan) RCS RS-27 AJ-10-118I
Application Delta-III and IV Booster stage for Attitude Delta II Space Delta II Second stage
upper stage H-II launcher control Launch booster
Manufacturer Pratt & Whitney, Mitsubishi Heavy Kaiser The Boeing Co., Aerojet Propulsion
United Technologies Industries Marquardt Rocketdyne Company
Corporation Company Propulsion &
Power
Thrust Chamber
Fuel Liquid H2 Liquid H2 MMH RP-I (kerosene) 50% N2H4/50%
UDMH
Oxidizer Liquid 02 Liquid 02 N204 Liquid oxygen N204
Thrust chamber thrust (lbf)
at sea level (lbf) No sea level firing I 90,400 12 164,700 NA
in vacuum (I bf) 24,750 242,500 18 207,000 9850
Thrust chamber mixture ratio 5.88 6.0 2.0 2.35 1.90
Thrust chamber specific impulse
at sea level (sec) NA 349.9 200 257
in vacuum (sec) 462 445.6 290 294 320
Characteristic exhaust velocity, c* (ft/sec) 7578 5594.8 5180 5540 5606
Thrust chamber propellant flow (lb/sec) 53.2 346.9 0.062 640 30.63
Injector end chamber pressure (psia) 640 70 576 125
Nozzle end stagnation pressure (psia) NA 1917 68 534
Thrust chamber sea level weight (!bf) < 150 1560 7 730 137
Gimbal mount sea level weight (lbf) <IO 57.3 NA 70 23
Chamber diameter (in.) 15.75 1.09 21 I 1.7
Nozzle throat diameter (in.) 5.2 9.25 0.427 16.2 7.5
Nozzle exit diameter (in.) 88 68.28 3.018 45.8 60
Nozzle exit area ratio 285 54:I 50:1 8:1 65:1
Chamber contraction area ratio 2.87 6:1 l.67: I 2.54:l
Characteristic chamber length L* (in.) 30.7 18 38.7 30.5
Thrust chamber overall length (in.) 90 14.8 l l.O 86.15 18.7
Fuel jacket and manifold volume (ft3 ) 3.5 2.5
Nozzle extension Carbon-carbon None None None None
Cumul. firing duration (sec) > 360* > 150
Restart capability Yes No Yes No Yes
Cooling system Stainless steel Regenerative (fuel) Radiation Stainless steel tubes, Ablative layer
tubes, lf passes cooled, stainless cooled, single pass, is partly consumed
regenerative cooled steel tubes niobium regenerative cooling
Tube diameter/channel width (in.) NA 0.05 (channel) NA 0.45 Ablative material:
Silica phenolic
Number of tubes NA 288 0 292
Jacket pressure drop (psi) 253 540 NA lOO NA
Injector type Concentric annular Hollow post/sleeve Drilled Flat plate, drilled Outer row: shower head;
swirl and resonator elements; baffle and holes rings and baffle triplets & doublets,
cavities acoustic cavities with dual tuned
resonator
Injector pressure drop-oxidizer (psi) 100 704 50 156 40
Injector pressure drop-fuel (psi) 54 154 50 140 40
Number of oxidizer injector orifices 216 452 (coaxial) 1 1145 1050
Number of fuel injector orifices 216 452 ( coaxial) 1530 1230
Engine Characteristics
Feed system Turbopump with Turbopump Pressure Turbopump with Pressure
expander cycle fed tanks gas generator fed tanks
Engine thrust ( at sea level) (lb) NA 190,400 12 165,000 NA
Engine thrust (altitude) (lb) 24,750 242,500 18 207,700 9850
Engine specific impulse at sea level NA 349.9 200 253 320
Engine specific impulse at altitude 462 445.6 290 288 320
Engine mixture ratio (oxidizer/fuel) 5.88 6.0 2.0 2.27 1.90
*limited only by available propellant.
~ Sources: Companies listed above and NASA.
c.> The thrust for the thrust chamber is usually slightly less than the thrust of the engine for open cycles, such as a gas generator cycle; the thrust chamber specific
impulse is actually slightly higher (about I%) than the engine specific impulse. For closed cycles such as the staged combustion cycle, the F and I, values of the
engine and thrust chamber are the same.
274 THRUST CHAMBERS
Fuel Oxidizer
manifolds manifolds ___ Face of
Oxidizer ~~r2.I~ Fuel injector
manifolds
manifolds
Doublet impinging Triplet impinging
stream pattern stream pattern
Typical impingement
bl·
point
Fuel
~-~-. ) /propTy ep li lc aal
n
s tt r sa trig eah mt
manifolds Fuel 17ri9.F==
Oxidizer manifolds
manifolds
Oxidizer--~~~=
manifolds
Self-impinging Shower head
stream pattern stream pattern
Inner tube Outer
Gaseous or post Spacer sleeve
hydrogen
Injector
face
Hollow post and Variable injection area
sleeve element concentric tube injector
FIGURE 8-3. Schematic diagrams of several injector types. The movable sleeve type
variable thrust injector is adapted from Ref. 8-1.
!ant flow over a wide range without excessive reduction in injector pressure
drop. This type of variable area concentric tube injector was used on the
descent engine of the Lunar Excursion Module and throttled over a 10: 1
range of flow with only a very small change in mixture ratio.
The coaxial hollow post injector has been used for liquid oxygen and gaseous
hydrogen injectors by most domestic and foreign rocket designers. It is shown in
the lower left of Fig. 8-3. It works well when the liquid hydrogen has absorbed
heat from cooling jackets and has been gasified. This gasified hydrogen flows at
high speed (typically 330 m/sec or 1000 ft/sec); the liquid oxygen flows far more
slowly (usually at less than 33 m/sec or 100 ft/sec) and the differential velocity
causes a shear action, which helps to break up the oxygen stream into small
droplets. The injector has a multiplicity of these coaxial posts on its face. This
8.1. INJECTORS 275
FIGURE 8-4. Injector with 90° self-impinging (fuel-against-fuel and oxidizer-against
oxidizer)-type countersunk doublet injection pattern. Large holes are inlets to fuel
manifolds. Pre-drilled rings are brazed alternately over an annular fuel manifold or
groove and a similar adjacent oxidizer manifold or groove. A section through a similar
but larger injector is shown in Fig. 8-1.
type of injector is not used with liquid storable bi propellants, in part because the
pressure drop to achieve high velocity would become too high.
The SSME injector shown in Fig. 9-6 uses 600 of these concentric sleeve
injection elements; 75 of them have been lengthened beyond the injector face to
form cooled baffles, which reduce the incidence of combustion instability.
The original method of making injection holes was to carefully drill them and
round out or chamfer their inlets. This is still being done today. It is difficult to
align these holes accurately (for good impingement) and to avoid burrs and
surface irregularities. One method that avoids these problems and allows a large
number of small accurate injecton orifices is to use multiple etched, very thin
plates (often called platelets) that are then stacked and diffusion bonded
together to form a monolithic structure as shown in Fig. 8-5. The photo-etched
pattern on each of the individual plates or metal sheets then provides not only
for many small injection orifices at the injector face, but also for internal dis
tribution or flow passages in the injector and sometimes also for a fine-mesh
filter inside the injector body. The platelets can be stacked parallel to or normal
to the injector face. The finished injector has been called the platelet injector and
has been patented by the Aerojet Propulsion Company.
276 THRUST CHAMBERS
0 0
0
0 0 O 0
Face plate with Fuel distribution Oxidizer distribution
inclined injection holes plate with etched manifold plate
(laser drilled) cooling passages
Alignment pins (2)
I
0
0
Four stacked plates
(with exaggerated thickness)
Cover plate with
oxidizer inlet
(a)
Oxidizer manifold
Fuel
filter
Like on like / Injector face
impinging orifices
Enlarged detail segment of
Cross section through an etched plate one design of like-on-like impinging
orifices and feed passage geometry
(b)
FIGURE 8-5. Simplified diagrams of two types of injector using a bonded platelet
construction technique: (a) injector for low thrust with four impinging unlike doublet
liquid streams; the individual plates are parallel to the injector face; (b) Like-on-like
impinging stream injector with 144 orifices; plates are perpendicular to the injector face.
(Courtesy of Aerojet Propulsion Company.)
Injector Flow Characteristics
The differences of the various injector configurations shown in Fig. 8-3 reflect
themselves in different hydraulic flow-pressure relationships, different starting
characteristics, atomization, resistance to self-induced vibrations, and combus
tion efficiency.
8.1. INJECTORS 277
The hydraulic injector characteristics can be evaluated accurately and can be
designed for orifices with the desired injection pressures, injection velocities,
flows, and mixture ratio. For a given thrust F and a given effective exhaust
m
velocity c, the total propellant mass flow mis given by = F/c from Eq. 2-6.
The relations between the mixture ratio, the oxidizer, and the fuel flow rates are
givenby Eqs. 6-1 to 6-4. For the flow of an incompressible fluid through
hydraulic orifices,
Q = CdAJ2b.p/p (8-1)
m= Qp = CdAJ2pb.p (8-2)
where Q is the volume flow rate, Cd the dimensionless discharge coefficient, p
the propellant mass density, A the cross-sectional area of the orifice, and b.p
the pressure drop. These relationships are general and can be applied to any
one section of the propellant feed system, to the injector, or to the overall liquid
flow system. A typical variation of injection orifice flow and pressure drop is
shown in Fig. 8-6. If the hole has a rounded entrance (top left sketch), it gives
the lowest pressure drop or the highest flow. Small differences in chamfers, hole
entry radius, or burrs at the edge of a hole can cause significant variations in
the discharge coefficient and the jet flow patterns, and these in turn can alter
_L.
0.1 -
~ ! ~
8mm
700
T
500
u .~c
r<1) -;:-
2
2 !"'
"'
~ 0.05- 400
OD
-~""-
~
0 0
G: G:: 300
200
Hole diameter 1.5 mm
100
O.Ql -
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Pressure drop, atm
FIGURE 8-6. Hydraulic characteristics of four types of injection orifice.
278 THRUST CHAMBERS
the quality and distribution of the atomized small droplets, the local mixture
ratio, and the local heat transfer rates. An improperly manufactured hole can
cause local chamber or injector burnout.
For any given pressure drops the injection orifices determine the mixture
ratio and the propellant flows of the rocket unit. From Eqs. 6-1 and 8-2 the
mixture ratio is
The quantities in the preceding equations have to be chosen so that the correct
design mixture ratio is attained, even if the total flow is varied slightly. Orifices
whose discharge coefficients are constant over a large range of Reynolds num
bers and whose ratio (Cd) /(Cd)f remains invariant should be selected. For a
0
given injector it is usually difficult to maintain the mixture ratio constant at low
flows or thrusts, such as in starting.
The quality of the injector is checked by performing cold tests with inert
simulant liquids instead of reactive propellant liquids. Often water is used to
confirm pressure drops through the fuel or oxidizer side at different flows and
this allows determination of the pressure drops with propellants and the dis
charge coefficients. Nonmixable inert liquids are used with a special apparatus
to determine the local cold flow mixture ratio distribution over the chamber
cross section. The simulant liquid should be of approximately the same density
and viscosity as the actual propellant. All new injectors are hot fired and tested
with actual propellants.
The actual mixture ratio can be estimated from cold flow test data, the
measured hole areas, and discharge coefficients by correcting by the square
root of the density ratio of the simulant liquid and the propellant. When water
at the same pressure is fed alternately into both the fuel and the oxidizer sides,
Dopf = D.p and PJ = Po and the water mixture ratio will be
0
(8-4)
Therefore, the mixture ratio measured in water tests can be converted into the
actual propellant mixture ratio by multiplying it by the square root of the
density ratio of the propellant combination and the square root of the pressure
drop ratio. The mechanism of propellant atomization with simultaneous
vaporization, partial combustion, and mixing is difficult to analyze, and per
formance of injectors has to be evaluated by experiment within a burning
rocket thrust chamber. The injection velocity is given by
v = Q/A = cdJ2D.p/ P (8-5)
Values of discharge coefficients for various types of injection orifices are shown
in Table 8-2. The velocity is a maximum for a given injection pressure drop
8.1. INJECTORS 279
TABLE 8-2. Injector Discharge Coefficients
Diameter Discharge
Orifice Type Diagram (mm) Coefficient
Sharp-edged Above 2.5 0.61
orifice Below 2.5 0.65 approx.
Short-tube with 1.00 0.88
rounded entrance 1.57 0.90
L/D > 3.0 1.00
(with L/ D ~ 1.0) 0.70
Short tube with 0.50 0.7
conical entrance 1.00 0.82
1.57 0.76
2.54 0.84-0.80
3.18 0.84-0.78
Short tube with 1.0--<5.4 0.2--0.55
spiral effect
Sharp-edged 1.00 0.70--0.69
cone 1.57 0.72
when the discharge coefficient equals 1. Smooth and well-rounded entrances to
the injection holes and clean bores give high values of the discharge coefficient
and this hole entry design is the most common.
When an oxidizer and a fuel jet impinge, the resultant momentum can be
calculated from the following relation, based on the principle of conservation
of momentum. Figure 8-7 illustrates a pair of impinging jets and defines y as
0
the angle between the chamber axis and the oxidizer stream, YJ as the angle
between the chamber axis and the fuel stream, and 8 as the angle between the
chamber axis and the average resultant stream. If the total momentum of the
two jets before and after impingement is equal,
(8--6)
280 THRUST CHAMBERS
Line of resultant
jet momentum
FIGURE 8-7. Angular relation of doublet impinging-stream injection pattern.
Good performance is often obtained when the resultant momentum of
impinging streams is approximately axial. If the resultant momentum is
along the chamber axis, o = 0, tan o = 0, and the angular relation for an axially
directed jet momentum is given by
(8-7)
y o
From these equations the relation between YJ, 0, and can be determined. A
sample injector analysis is shown in Section 8.6.
Factors Influencing Injector Behavior
A complete theory relating injector design parameters to rocket performance
and combustion phenomena has not yet been devised, and therefore the
approach to the design and development of liquid propellant rocket injectors
has been largely empirical. Yet the available data indicate several important
factors that affect the performance and operating characteristics of injectors;
some of these are briefly enumerated here.
Propellant Combination. The particular combination of fuel and oxidizer
affects such characteristics as the relative chemical reactivity, the ease and
speed of vaporization, the ignition temperature, the diffusion of hot gases,
the volatility, or the surface tension. Hypergolic (self-igniting) propellants
generally require injector designs somewhat different from those required by
propellants that must be ignited. Injector designs that perform well with one
combination generally do not work too well with a different propellant
combination.
Injection Orifice Pattern and Orifice Size. With individual holes in the
injector plate, there appears to be an optimum performance and/or heat
transfer condition for each of the following parameters: orifice size, angle of
impingement, angle of resultant momentum, distance of the impingement
8.1. INJECTORS 281
locus from the injector face, number of injection orifices per unit of injector
face surface, flow per unit of injection orifice, and distribution of orifices
over the mJector face. These parameters are largely determined
experimentally or from similar earlier successful injectors.
Transient Conditions. Starting and stopping may require special
provisions (temporary plugging of holes, accurate valve timing, insertion of
paper cups over holes to prevent entry of one propellant into the manifold
of the other propellant, or check valves) to permit satisfactory transient
operation.
Hydraulic Characteristics. The orifice type and the pressure drop across
the injection orifice determine the injection velocity. A low pressure drop is
desirable to minimize the weight of the feed system or the pumping power
and improve the overall rocket efficiency, yet high pressure drops are used
often to increase the rocket's resistance to combustion instability and
enhance atomization of the liquids.
Heat Transfer. Injectors influence the performance and the heat transferred
in rocket thrust chambers. Low heat transfer rates have been obtained when
the injection pattern resulted in an intentionally rich mixture near the
chamber walls. In general, the higher performance injectors have a higher
heat-transfer rate to the walls of the combustion chamber, the nozzle, and
the injector face.
Structural Design. The mJector is highly loaded by pressure forces from
the combustion chamber and the propellant manifolds. During transition
(starting or stopping) these pressure conditions can cause stresses which
sometimes exceed the steady-state operating conditions. The faces of many
modern injectors are flat and must be reinforced by suitable structures which
nevertheless provide no obstructions to the hydraulic manifold passages; the
structure must also be sufficiently flexible to allow thermal deformations
caused by heating the injector face with hot combustion gases or cooling by
cryogenic propellants. The injector design must also provide for positive
seals between fuel and oxidizer manifolds (an internal leak can cause
manifold explosions or internal fires) and a sealed attachment of the injector
to the chamber. In large, gimbal-mounted thrust chambers the injector also
often carries the main thrust load, and a gimbal mount is often directly
attached to the injector, a shown in Figs. 6-1 and 8-1.
Combustion Stability. The injection hole pattern, impingement pattern,
hole distribution, and pressure drop have a strong influence on combustion
stability; some types are much more resistant to pressure disturbances. As
explained in Section 9-3, the resistance to vibration is determined
282 THRUST CHAMBERS
experimentally, and often special antivibration devices, such as baffles or
resonance cavities, are designed directly into the injector.
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE
The combustion chamber is that part of a thrust chamber where the combus
tion or burning of the propellant takes place. The combustion temperature is
much higher than the melting points of most chamber wall materials.
Therefore it is necessary either to cool these walls (as described in a later
section of this chapter) or to stop rocket operation before the critical wall
areas become too hot. If the heat transfer is too high and thus the wall
temperatures become locally too high, the thrust chamber will fail. Heat
transfer to thrust chambers will be described later in this chapter. Section
8.6 gives a sample analysis of a thrust chamber and Ref. 8-2 describes the
design and development of one.
Volume and Shape
Spherical chambers give the least internal surface area and mass per unit
chamber volume; they are expensive to build and several have been tried.
Today we prefer a cylindrical chamber (or slightly tapered cone frustum)
with a flat injector and a converging-diverging nozzle. The chamber volume
is defined as the volume up to the nozzle throat section and it includes the
cylindrical chamber and the converging cone frustum of the nozzle. Neglecting
the effect of the corner radii, the chamber volume Ve is
(8-8)
Here Lis the cylinder length, A 1 / A 1 is the chamber contraction ratio, and Le is
the length of the conical frustum. The approximate surfaces exposed to heat
transfer from hot gas comprise the injector face, the inner surface of the cylin
der chamber, and the inner surface of the converging cone frustrum. The
volume and shape are selected after evaluating these parameters:
1. The volume has to be large enough for adequate mixing, evaporation, and
complete combustion of propellants. Chamber volumes vary for different
propellants with the time delay necessary to vaporize and activate the
propellants and with the speed of reaction of the propellant combination.
When the chamber volume is too small, combustion is incomplete and
the performance is poor. With higher chamber pressures or with highly
reactive propellants, and with injectors that give improved mixing, a
smaller chamber volume is usually permissible.
2. The chamber diameter and volume can influence the cooling require
ments. If the chamber volume and the chamber diameter are large, the
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 283
heat transfer rates to the walls will be reduced, the area exposed to heat
will be large, and the walls are somewhat thicker. Conversely, if the
volume and cross section are small, the inner wall surface area and the
inert mass will be smaller, but the chamber gas velocities and the heat
transfer rates will be increased. There is an optimum chamber volume
and diameter where the total heat absorbed by the walls will be a mini
mum. This is important when the available cooling capacity of the cool
ant is limited (for example oxygen-hydrocarbon at high mixture ratios)
or if the maximum permissive coolant temperature has to be limited (for
safety reasons with hydrazine cooling). The total heat transfer can also be
further reduced by going to a rich mixture ratio or by adding film cooling
( discussed below).
3. All inert components should have minimum mass. The thrust chamber
mass is a function of the chamber dimensions, chamber pressure, and
nozzle area ratio, and the method of cooling.
4. Manufacturing considerations favor a simple chamber geometry, such as
a cylinder with a double cone bow-tie-shaped nozzle, low cost materials,
and simple fabrication processes.
5. In some applications the length of the chamber and the nozzle relate
directly to the overall length of the vehicle. A large-diameter but short
chamber can allow a somewhat shorter vehicle with a lower structural
inert vehicle mass.
6. The gas pressure drop for accelerating the combustion products within
the chamber should be a minimum; any pressure reduction at the nozzle
inlet reduces the exhaust velocity and the performance of the vehicle.
These losses become appreciable when the chamber area is less than
three times the throat area.
7. For the same thrust the combustion volume and the nozzle throat area
become smaller as the operating chamber pressure is increased. This
means that the chamber length and the nozzle length (for the same
area ratio) also decrease with increasing chamber pressure. The perfor
mance also goes up with chamber pressure.
The preceding chamber considerations conflict with each other. It is, for
instance, impossible to have a large chamber that gives complete combustion
but has a low mass. Depending on the application, a compromise solution that
will satisfy the majority of these considerations is therefore usually selected and
verified by experiment.
The characteristic chamber length is defined as the length that a chamber of
the same volume would have if it were a straight tube and had no converging
nozzle section.
(8-9)
284 THRUST CHAMBERS
where L* (pronounced el star) is the characteristic chamber length, A, is the
nozzle throat area, and Ve is the chamber volume. The chamber includes all the
volume up to the throat area. Typical values for L* are between 0.8 and 3.0
meters (2.6 to 10 ft) for several bipropellants and higher for some monopro
pellants. Because this parameter does not consider any variables except the
throat area, it is useful only for a particular propellant combination and a
narrow range of mixture ratio and chamber pressure. The parameter L* was
used about 40 years ago, but today the chamber volume and shape are chosen
by using data from successful thrust chambers of prior similar designs and
identical propellants.
The stay time t., of the propellant gases is the average value of the time spent
by each molecule or atom within the chamber volume. It is defined by
(8-10)
m
where is the propellant mass flow, V is the average specific volume or
1
volume per unit mass of propellant gases in the chamber, and Ve is the chamber
volume. The minimum stay time at which a good performance is attained
defines the chamber volume that gives essentially complete combustion. The
stay time varies for different propellants and has to be experimentally deter
mined. It includes the time necessary for vaporization, activation, and com
plete burning of the propellant. Stay times have values of 0.001 to 0.040 sec for
different types of thrust chambers and propellants.
The nozzle dimensions and configuration can be determined from the ana
lyses presented in Chapter 3. The converging section of the supersonic nozzle
experiences a much higher internal gas pressure than the diverging section and
therefore the design of the converging wall is similar to the design of the
cylindrical chamber wall. Most thrust chambers use a shortened bell shape
for the diverging nozzle section. Nozzles with area ratios up to 400 have
been developed.
In Chapter 3 it was stated that very large nozzle exit area ratios allow a small
but significant improvement in specific impulse, particularly at very high alti
tudes; however, the extra length and extra vehicle mass necessary to house a
large nozzle make this unattractive. This disadvantage can be mitigated by a
multipiece nozzle, that is stored in annular pieces around the engine during the
ascent of the launch vehicle and automatically assembled in space after launch
vehicle separation and before firing. This concept, known as extendible nozzle
cone, has been successfully employed in solid propellant rocket motors for
space applications for about 20 years. The first flight with an extendible nozzle
on a liquid propellant engine was performed in 1998 with a modified version of
a Pratt & Whitney upper stage engine. Its flight performance is listed in Table
8-1. The engine is shown later in Fig. 8-19 and its carbon-carbon extendible
nozzle cone is described in the section on Materials and Fabrication.
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 285
Heat Transfer Distribution
Heat is transmitted to all internal hardware surfaces exposed to hot gases,
namely the injector face, the chamber and nozzle walls. The heat transfer
rate or heat transfer intensity, that is, local wall temperatures and heat transfer
per unit wall area, varies within the rocket. A typical heat transfer rate dis
tribution is shown in Fig. 8-8. Only! to 5% of the total energy generated in the
gas is transferred as heat to the chamber walls. For a typical rocket of 44,820 N
or 10,000 lbfthrust the heat rejection rate to the wall may be between 0.75 and
3.5 MW, depending on the exact conditions and design. See Section 8.3.
The amount of heat transferred by conduction from the chamber gas to the
walls in a rocket thrust chamber is negligible. By far the largest part of the heat
is transferred by means of convection. A part (usually 5 to 35%) of the trans
ferred heat is attributable to radiation.
For constant chamber pressure, the chamber wall surface increases less
rapidly than the volume as the thrust level is raised. Thus the cooling of
chambers is generally easier in large thrust sizes, and the capacity of the wall
material or the coolant to absorb all the heat rejected by the hot gas is generally
more critical in smaller sizes, because of the volume-surface relationship.
Higher chamber pressure leads to higher vehicle performance (higher l but
5),
also to higher engine inert mass. However, the resulting increase of heat transfer
with chamber pressure often imposes design or material limits on the maximum
practical chamber pressure for both liquid and solid propellant rockets.
The heat transfer intensity in chemical rocket propulsion can vary from less
than 50 W/cm2 or 0.3 Btu/in.2-sec to over 16 kW/cm2 or 100 Btu/in.2-sec. The
Thrust chamber contour
FIGURE 8--8. Typical axial heat transfer rate distribution for liquid propellant thrust
chambers and solid propellant rocket motors. The peak is always at the nozzle throat
and the lowest value is usually near the nozzle exit.
286 THRUST CHAMBERS
high values are for the nozzle throat region of large bipropellant thrust cham
bers and high-pressure solid rocket motors. The lower values are for gas gen
erators, nozzle exit sections, or small thrust chambers at low chamber
pressures.
Cooling of Thrust Chambers
The primary objective of cooling is to prevent the chamber and nozzle walls
from becoming too hot, so they will no longer be able to withstand the imposed
loads or stresses, thus causing the chamber or nozzle to fail. Most wall materi
als lose strength and become weaker as temperature is increased. These loads
and stresses are discussed in the next section. With further heating, the walls
would ultimately fail or even melt. Cooling thus reduces the wall temperatures
to an acceptable value.
Basically, there are two cooling methods in common use today. The first is
the steady state method. The heat transfer rate and the temperatures of the
chambers reach thermal equilibrium. This includes regenerative cooling and
radiation cooling. The duration is limited only by the available supply of pro
pellant.
Regenerative cooling is done by building a cooling jacket around the thrust
chamber and circulating one of the liquid propellants (usually the fuel) through
it before it is fed to the injector. This cooling technique is used primarily with
bipropellant chambers of medium to large thrust. It has been effective in
applications with high chamber pressure and high heat transfer rates. Also,
most injectors use regenerative cooling.
In radiation cooling the chamber and/or nozzle have only a single wall made
of high temperature material. When it reaches thermal equilibrium, this wall
usually glows red or white hot and radiates heat away to the surroundings or to
empty space. Radiation cooling is used with monopropellant thrust chambers,
bipropellant and monopropellant gas generators, and for diverging nozzle
exhaust sections beyond an area ratio of about 6 to 10 (see Fig. 8-2). A few
small bipropellant thrusters are also radiation cooled. This cooling scheme has
worked well with lower chamber pressures (less than 250 psi) and moderate
heat transfer rates.
The second cooling method relies on transient heat transfer or unsteady heat
transfer. It is also called heat sink cooling. The thrust chamber does not reach a
thermal equilibrium, and temperatures continue to increase with operating
duration. The heat absorbing capacity of the hardware determines its max
imum duration. The rocket combustion operation has to be stopped just before
any of the exposed walls reaches a critical temperature at which it could fail.
This method has mostly been used with low chamber pressures and low heat
transfer rates. Heat sink cooling of thrust chambers can be done by absorbing
heat in an inner liner made of an ablative material, such as fiber-reinforced
plastics. Ablative materials are used extensively in solid propellant rocket
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 287
motors and will be discussed further in Chapters 11 and 14. The analysis of
both of these cooling methods is given in the next section of this chapter.
Film cooling and special insulation are supplementary techniques that are
used occasionally with both methods to locally augment their cooling capabil
ity. All these cooling methods will be described further in this chapter.
Cooling also helps to reduce the oxidation of the wall material and the rate
at which walls would be eaten away. The rates of chemical oxidizing reactions
between the hot gas and the wall material can increase dramatically with wall
temperature. This oxidation problem can be minimized not only by limiting the
wall temperature, but also by burning the liquid propellants at a mixture ratio
where the percentage of aggressive gases in the hot gas (such as oxygen or
hydroxyl) is very small, and by coating certain wall materials with an oxida
tion-resistant coating; for example iridium has been coated on the inside of
rhenium walls.
Cooling with Steady-State Heat Transfer. Cooled thrust chambers have
provisions for cooling some or all metal parts coming into contact with hot
gases, such as chamber walls, nozzle walls, and injector faces. Internal
cooling passages, cooling jackets, or cooling coils permit the circulation of a
coolant. Jackets can consist of separate inner and outer walls or of an
assembly of contoured, adjacent tubes (see Figs. 8-1 and 8-9). The inner
wall confines the gases, and the spaces between the walls serves as the
coolant passage. The nozzle throat region is usually the location that has the
highest heat-transfer intensity and is therefore the most difficult to cool. For
this reason the cooling jacket is often designed so that the coolant velocity is
highest at the critical regions by restricting the coolant passage cross section,
=
Exit (Section C)
tIDl'.l Chamber
I : (Section B)
I n1. ec t or /I II Throat \11111 (ST ech tr ioo na t A)
PlIu . g. ~.. -. iL -,- ._· B --·--·-- A ·--·-·--- ~ -·-
.~.... ·
:-: -.,._
-~ ~
Top view without
manifold
FIGURE 8-9. Diagram of a tubular cooling jacket. The tubes are bent to the chamber
and nozzle contours; they are formed hydraulically to give a variable cross section to
permit the same number of tubes at the throat and exit diameters. Coolant enters
through the inlet manifold into every other tube and proceeds axially to the nozzle
exit manifold, where it then enters the alternate tubes and returns axially to go directly
to the injector.
288 THRUST CHAMBERS
and so that the fresh cold coolant enters the jacket at or near the nozzle.
While the selection of the coolant velocity and its variation along the wall
for any given thrust chamber design depends on heat-transfer considerations,
the selection of the coolant passage geometry often depends on pressure loss,
stresses, and manufacturing considerations. An axial flow cooling jacket, or a
tubular wall, has a low hydraulic friction loss but is practical only for large
coolant flows (above approximately 9 kg/sec). For small coolant flows and
small thrust units, the design tolerances of the cooling jacket width between
the inner and outer walls or the diameters of the tubes, become too small, or
the tolerances become prohibitive. Therefore, most small thrust chambers
use radiation cooling or ablative materials.
In regenerative cooling the heat absorbed by the coolant is not wasted; it
augments the initial energy content of the propellant prior to injection, increas
ing the exhaust velocity slightly (0.1 to 1.5% ). This method is called regenera
tive cooling because of the similarity to steam regenerators. The design of the
tubular chamber and nozzle combines the advantages of a thin wall (good for
reducing thermal stresses and high wall temperatures) and a cool, lightweight
structure. Tubes are formed to special shapes and contours (see Figs. 8-1 and
8-9), usually by hydraulic means, and then brazed, welded, or soldered
together (see Ref. 8-3). In order to take the gas pressure loads in hoop tension,
they are reinforced on the outside by high-strength bands or wires. While Fig.
8-9 shows alternate tubes for up and down flow, there are chambers where the
fuel inlet manifold is downstream of the nozzle throat area and where the
coolant flow is up and down in the nozzle exit region, but unidirectionally
up in the throat and chamber regions.
Radiation cooling is another steady-state method of cooling. It is simple and
is used extensively in the low heat transfer applications listed previously.
Further discussion of radiation cooling is given in the Materials and
Fabrication subsection. In order for heat to be radiated into space, it is usually
necessary for the bare nozzle and chamber to stick out of the vehicle. Figure
8-18 shows a radiation-cooled thrust chamber. Since the white hot glowing
radiation-cooled chambers and/or nozzles are potent radiators, they may cause
undesirable heating of adjacent vehicle or engine components. Therefore, many
have insulation (see Fig. 8-15) or simple external radiation shields to minimize
these thermal effects; however, in these cases the actual chamber or nozzle wall
temperatures are higher than they would be without the insulation or shielding.
Cooling with Transient Heat Transfer. Thrust chambers with unsteady
heat transfer are basically of two types. One is a simple metal chamber (steel,
copper, stainless steel, etc.) made with walls sufficiently thick to absorb
plenty of heat energy. For short-duration testing of injectors, testing of new
propellants, rating combustion stability, and very-short-duration rocket
propelled missiles, such as an antitank weapon, a heavy-walled simple, short
duration steel chamber is often used. The common method of ablative
cooling or heat sink cooling uses a combination of endothermic reactions
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 289
(breakdown or distillation of matrix material into smaller compounds and
gases), pyrolysis of organic materials, counter-current heat flow and coolant
gas mass flow, charring and localized melting. An ablative material usually
consists of a series of strong, oriented fibers (such as glass, Kevlar, or
carbon fibers) engulfed by a matrix of an organic material (such as plastics,
epoxy resins or phenolic resins). As shown in Fig. 14-11, the gases seep out
of the matrix and form a protective film cooling layer on the inner wall
surfaces. The fibers and the residues of the matrix form a hard char or
porous coke-like material that preserves the wall contour shapes.
The orientation, number and type of fiber determine the ability of the com
posite ablative material to withstand significant stresses in preferred directions.
For example, internal pressure produces longitudinal as well as hoop stresses in
the thrust chamber walls and thermal stresses produce compression on the
inside of the walls and tensile stresses on the outside. We have learned how
to place the fibers in two or three directions, which makes them anisotropic.
We then speak of 2-D and 3-D fiber orientation.
A set of strong carbon fibers in a matrix of amorphous carbon is a special,
but favorite type of material. It is often abbreviated as C-C or carbon-carbon.
The carbon materials lose their ability to carry loads at about 3700 K or 6200
F. Because carbon oxidizes readily to form CO or CO 2, its best applications are
with fuel-rich propellant mixtures that have little or no free oxygen or hydroxyl
in their exhaust. It is used for nozzle throat inserts. Properties for one type of
C-C are given in Table 14-5.
Ablative cooling was first used and is still used extensively with solid pro
pellant rocket motors. It has since been successfully applied to liquid propel
lant thrust chambers, particularly at low chamber pressure, short duration
(including several short-duration firings over a long total time period) and
also in nozzle extensions for both large and small thrust chambers, where
the static gas temperatures are relatively low. It is not usually effective for
cooling if the chamber pressures are high, the exhaust gases contain oxidative
species, or the firing durations are long.
Repeatedly starting and stopping (also known as pulsing) presents a more
severe thermal condition for ablative materials than operating for the same
cumulative firing time but without interruption. Figure 8-10 shows that for
small pulsing rockets, which fire only 4 to 15% of the time, the consumption or
pyrolysis of the ablative liner is a maximum. This curve varies and depends on
the specific duty cycle of firings, the design, the materials, and the pauses
between the firings. The duty cycle for a pulsing thruster was defined in
Chapter 6 as the average percent of burning or operating time divided by
the total elapsed time. Between pulsed firings there is a heat soak back from
the hot parts of the thruster to the cooler outer parts ( causing them to become
softer) and also a heat loss by radiation to the surroundings. At a duty cycle
below 3%, there is sufficient time between firings for cooling by radiation. At
long burning times (above 50%) the ablative material's hot layers act as
insulators and prevent the stress-bearing portions from becoming too hot.
290 THRUST CHAMBERS
100
~
O~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0 ~ 100%
Burning time/total time
FIGURE 8-10. Relative depth of pyrolysis of ablative material with different duty
cycles using many short-duration thrust pulses for a small liquid propellant reaction
control thrust chamber of 20 !bf thrust.
Depending on the design, the thrusters with duty cycles between 4 and 25%
have the most severe thermal loading.
It is often advantageous to use a different cooling method for the down
stream part of the diverging nozzle section, because its heat transfer rate per
unit area is usually much lower than in the chamber or the converging nozzle
section, particularly with nozzles of large area ratio. There is usually a small
saving in inert engine mass, a small increase in performance, and a cost saving,
if the chamber and the converging nozzle section and the throat region (up to
an area ratio of perhaps 5 to 10) use regenerative cooling and the remainder of
the nozzle exit section is radiation cooled (or sometimes ablative cooled). See
Fig. 8-2 and Ref. 8--4.
Film Cooling
This is an auxiliary method applied to chambers and/or nozzles, augmenting
either a marginal steady-state or a transient cooling method. It can be applied
to a complete thrust chamber or just to the nozzle, where heat transfer is the
highest. Film cooling is a method of cooling whereby a relatively cool thin fluid
film covers and protects exposed wall surfaces from excessive heat transfer. Fig.
8-11 shows film-cooled chambers. The film is introduced by injecting small
quantities of fuel or an inet fluid at very low velocity through a large number of
orifices along the exposed surfaces in such a manner that a protective relatively
cool gas film is formed. A coolant with a high heat of vaporization and a high
boiling point is particularly desirable. In liquid propellant rocket engines extra
fuel can also be admitted through extra injection holes at the outer layers of the
injector; thus a propellant mixture is achieved (at the periphery of the cham
ber), which has a much lower combustion temperature. This differs from film
cooling or transpiration cooling because there does not have to be a chamber
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 291
Annular zone
of extra fuel
injection
Hot burning Liquid
solid propellant propellant
injection
Layer of
relatively
cool gas
Cool burning
solid propellant
CJ( insulator
Graphite
insert
Layer of Layer of
relatively relatively
cool gas cool gas
FIGURE 8-11. Simplified diagrams of three different methods of forming a cool
boundary layer.
cooling jacket or film-cooling manifolds. In solid propellant rocket engines this
can be accomplished by inserting a ring of cool-burning propellant upstream of
the nozzle, as shown in Fig. 8-11 or by wall insulation materials, whose abla
tion and charring will release relatively cool gases into the boundary layer.
Turbine discharge gas (700 to l l00°C) has also been used as a film coolant
for uncooled nozzle exit sections of large liquid propellant rocket engines. Of
course, the ejection of an annular gas layer at the periphery of the nozzle exit,
at a temperature lower than the maximum possible value, causes a decrease in a
specific impulse. Therefore, it is desirable to reduce both the thickness of this
cooler layer and the mass flow of cooler gas, relative to the total flow, to a
practical minimum value.
A special type of film cooling, sweat cooling or transpiration cooling, uses a
porous wall material which admits a coolant through pores uniformly over the
surface. This technique has been successfully used to cool injector faces in the
upper stage engine (J-2) of the moon launch vehicle and the Space Shuttle main
engine (SSME) with hydrogen fuel.
Thermal Insulation
Theoretically, a good thermal insulation layer on the gas side of the chamber
wall can be very effective in reducing chamber wall heat transfer and wall
temperatures. However, efforts with good insulation materials such as refrac
tory oxides or ceramic carbides have not been successful. They will not with-
292 THRUST CHAMBERS
stand differential thermal expansion without cracking or spalling. A sharp edge
on the surface (c rack or flaked-off piece of insulator) will cause a sudden rise in
the stagnation temperature and most likely lead to a local failure. Asbestos is a
good insulator and was used several decades ago; because it is a cancer causing
agent, it is no longer used. Coating development efforts with rhenium and
other materials are continuing.
Insulation or heat shields have been successfully applied on the exterior of
radiation-cooled thrust chambers to reduce the heat transfer to adjacent sensi
tive equipment or structures. With hydrocarbon fuels it is possible to form
small carbon particles or soot in the hot gas and that can lead to a carbon
deposit on the gas side of the chamber or nozzle walls. If it is a thin, mildly
adhesive soot, it can be an insulator, but it is difficult to reproduce such a
coating. More likely it forms hard, caked deposits, which can be spalled off in
localized flakes and form sharp edges, and then it is undesirable. Most
designers have preferred instead to use film cooling or extra high coolant
velocities in the cooling jacket with injectors that do not create adhesive soot.
Hydraulic Losses in the Cooling Passage
The cooling coil or cooling jacket should be designed so that the fluid adsorbs
all the heat transferred across the inner motor wall, and so that the coolant
pressure drop will be small.
A higher pressure drop allows a higher coolant velocity in the cooling jacket,
will do a better job of cooling, but requires a heavier feed system, which
increases the engine mass slightly and thus also the total inert vehicle mass.
For many liquid propellant rockets the coolant velocity in the chamber is
approximately 3 to 10 m/sec or 10 to 33 ft/sec and, at the nozzle throat, 6 to
24 m/sec or 20 to 80 ft/sec.
A cooling passage can be considered to be a hydraulic pipe, and the friction
loss can be calculated accordingly. For a straight pipe,
tJ.p / p = !fv2(L/ D) (8-11)
where tJ.p is the friction pressure loss, p the coolant mass density, L the length
of coolant passage, D the equivalent diameter, v the average velocity in the
cooling passage, and f the friction loss coefficient. In English engineeering
units the right side of the equation has to be divided by g 0, the sea-level
acceleration of gravity (32.2 ft/sec\ The friction loss coefficient is a function
of Reynolds number and has values betwen 0.02 and 0.05. A typical pressure
loss of a cooling jacket is between 5 and 25% of the chamber pressure.
A large portion of the pressure drop in a cooling jacket usually occurs in
those locations where the flow direction or the flow-passage cross section is
changed. Here the sudden expansion or contraction causes a loss, sometimes
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 293
larger than the velocity head v2 /2. This hydraulic situation exists in inlet and
outlet chamber manifolds, injector passages, valves, and expansion joints.
The pressure loss in the cooling passages of a thrust chamber can be calcu
lated, but more often it is measured. This pressure loss is usually determined in
cold flow tests (with an inert fluid instead of the propellant and without com
bustion), and then the measured value is corrected for the actual propellant
(different physical properties) and the hot firing conditions; a higher tempera
ture will change propellant densities or viscosities and in some designs it
changes the cross section of cooling flow passages.
Chamber Wall Loads and Stresses
The analysis of loads and stresses is performed on all propulsion components
during their engineering design. Its purpose is to assure the propulsion designer
and the flight vehicle user that (I) the components are strong enough to carry
all the loads, so that they can fulfill their intended function; (2) potential fail
ures have been identified, together with the possible remedies or redesigns; and
(3) their masses have been reduced to a practical minimum. In this section we
concentrate on the loads and stresses in the walls of thrust chambers, where
high heat fluxes and large thermal stresses complicate the stress analysis. Some
of the information on safety factors and stress analysis apply also to all pro
pulsion systems, including solid propellant motors and electric propulsion.
The safety factors (really margins for ignorance) are very small in rocket
propulsion when compared to commercial machinery, where these factors can
be 2 to 6 times larger. Several load conditions are considered for each rocket
component; they are:
I. Maximum expected working load is the largest likely operating load under
all likely operating conditions or transients. Examples are operating at a
slightly higher chamber pressure than nominal as set by tolerances in
design or fabrication (an example is the tolerance in setting the tank
pressure regulator) or the likely transient overpressure from ignition
shock.
2. The design limit load is typically 1.20 times the maximum expected work
ing load, to provide a margin. If the variation in material composition,
material properties, the uncertainties in the method of stress analysis, or
predicted loads are significant, a larger factor may be selected.
3. The damaging load can be based on the yield load or the ultimate load or
the endurance limit load, whichever gives the lowest value. The yield load
causes a permanent set or deformation, and it is typically set as 1.10 times
the design limit load. The endurance limit may be set by fatigue or creep
considerations (such as in pulsing). The ultimate load induces a stress
equal to the ultimate strength of the material, where significant elonga
tion and area reduction can lead to failure. Typically it is set as 1.50 times
the design limit load.
294 THRUST CHAMBERS
4. The proof test load is applied to engines or their components during
development and manufacturing inspection. It is often equal to the
design limit load, provided this load condition can be simulated in a
laboratory. Thrust chambers and other components, whose high thermal
stresses are difficult to simulate, use actual hot firing tests to obtain this
proof, often with loads that approach the design limit load (for example,
higher than nominal chamber pressure or a mixture ratio that results in
hotter gas).
The walls of all thrust chambers are subjected to radial and axial loads from
the chamber pressure, flight accelerations (axial and transverse), vibration, and
thermal stresses. They also have to withstand a momentary ignition pressure
surge or shock, often due to excessive propellant accumulation in the chamber.
This surge can exceed the nominal chamber pressure. In addition, the chamber
walls have to transmit thrust loads as well as forces and in some applications
also moments, imposed by thrust vector control devices described in Chapter
16. Walls also have to survive a "thermal shock", namely, the initial thermal
stresses at rapid starting. When walls are cold or at ambient temperature, they
experience higher gas heating rates than after the walls have been heated. These
loads are different for almost every design, and each unit has to be considered
individually in determining the wall strengths.
A heat transfer analysis is usually done only for the most critical wall
regions, such as at and near the nozzle throat, at a critical location in the
chamber, and sometimes at the nozzle exit. The thermal stresses induced by
the temperature difference across the wall are often the most severe stresses and
a change in heat transfer or wall temperature distribution will affect the stresses
in the wall. Specific failure criteria (wall temperature limit, reaching yield stress,
or maximum coolant temperature, etc.) have to be established for these
analyses.
The temperature differential introduces a compressive stress on the inside
and a tensile stress on the outside of the inner wall; the stress s can be calcu
lated for simple cylindrical chamber walls that are thin in relation to their
radius as
s = 2)..£ t:i,.T/(1 - v) (8-12)
where A is the coefficient of thermal expansion of the wall material, E the
modulus of elasticity of the wall material, t:i,.T the temperature drop across
the wall, and v the Poisson ratio of the wall material. Temperature stresses
frequently exceed the yield point. The materials experience a change in the yield
strength and the modulus of elasticity with temperature. The preceding equa
tion is applicable only to elastic deformations. This yielding of rocket thrust
chamber wall materials can be observed by the small and gradual contraction
of the throat diameter after each operation (perhaps 0.05% reduction in throat
diameter after each firing) and the formation of progressive cracks of the inside
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 295
wall surface of the chamber and throat after successive runs. These phenomena
limit the useful life and number of starts or temperature cycles of a thrust
chamber (see Refs. 8-5 and 8-6).
In selecting a working stress for the wall material of a thrust chamber, the
variation of strength with temperature and the temperature stresses over the
wall thickness have to be considered. The temperature drop across the inner
wall is typically between 50 and 550 K, and an average temperature is some
times used for estimating the material properties. The most severe thermal
stresses can occur during the start, when the hot gases cause thermal shock
to the hardware. These transient thermal gradients cause severe thermal strain
and local yielding.
A picture of a typical stress distribution caused by pressure loads and ther
mal gradients is shown in Fig. 8-12. Here the inner wall is subjected to a
compressive pressure differential caused by a high liquid pressure in the cooling
jacket and a relatively large temperature gradient. In a large rocket chamber,
I
I
3000K : Liquid
coolant
1
"'2400 K
I
I
] 1800K I
i
I
I
1200K
f-E-Liquid film
~ I
600K I
~~~~~!
Typical temperature
OK
distribution
g
·;;;
C:
+~
4. Actual stress in wall with yielding
L at hot gas side and changing
C:
.Q modulus of elasticity
"' :::1c::::: !:::;::::;;.:.~,;:,·
~
a. - 5
E
8
r-wall th,ckness--j
---. -Distance from thrust chamber axis
FIGURE 8-12. Typical stresses in a thrust chamber inner wall.
296 THRUST CHAMBERS
such as is used in the Redstone missile, the wall thickness of the nozzle steel
way may be 7 mm and the temperature differential across it may readily exceed
several hundred degrees. This temperature gradient causes the hot inner wall
surface to expand more than the wall surface on the coolant side and imposes a
high compressive thermal stress on the inside surface and a high tensile thermal
stress on the coolant side. In these thick walls the stress induced by the pressure
load is usually small compared to the thermal stress. The resultant stress dis
tribution in thick inner walls (shown shaded in the sample stress diagram of
Fig. 8-12) indicates that the stress in the third of the wall adjacent to the hot
gases has exceeded the yield point. Because the modulus of elasticity and the
yield point diminish with temperature, the stress distribution is not linear over
the yielded portion of the wall. In effect, this inner portion acts as a heat shield
for the outer portion which carries the load.
Because of the differential expansion between the hot inner shell and the
relatively cold outer shell, it is necessary to provide for axial expansion joints
to prevent severe temperature stresses. This is particularly critical in larger
double-walled thrust chambers. The German V-2 thrust chamber expanded
over 5 mm in an axial and 4 mm in a radial direction.
Tubes for tubular wall thrust chambers are subjected to several different
stress conditions. Only that portion of an individual cooling tube exposed to
hot chamber gases experiences high thermal stresses and deformation as shown
in Fig. 8-17. The tubes have to hold the internal coolant pressure, absorb the
thermal stresses, and contain the gas pressure in the chamber. The hottest
temperature occurs in the center of the outer surface of that portion of each
tube exposed to hot gas. The thermal stresses are relatively low, since the
temperature gradient is small; copper has a high conductivity and the walls
are relatively thin (0.5 to 2 mm). The coolant pressure-induced load on the
tubes is relatively high, particularly if the thrust chamber operates at high
chamber pressure. The internal coolant pressure tends to separate the tubes.
The gas pressure loads in the chamber are usually taken by reinforcing bands
which are put over the outside of the tubular jacket assembly (see Fig. 8-1 and
8-9). The joints between the tubes have to be gas tight and this can be accom
plished by soldering, welding, or brazing.
When a high-area-ratio nozzle is operated at high ambient pressure, the
lower part of the nozzle structure experiences a compression because the pres
sure in the nozzle near the exit is actually below atmospheric value. Therefore,
high-area-ratio nozzles usually have stiffening rings on the outside of the nozzle
near the exit to maintain a circular shape and thus prevent buckling, flutter, or
thrust misalignment.
Aerospike Thrust Chamber
A separate category comprises thrust chambers using a center body, such as a
plug nozzle or aerospike nozzle. They have more surface to cool than ordinary
thrust chambers. A circular aerospike thruster is described in Chapter 3 and
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 297
shown schematically in Fig. 3-12. Here the diameter of the exhaust flow plume
increases with altitude. A linear version of a truncated (shortened) aerospike
thrust chamber is currently being developed with liquid oxygen and liquid
hydrogen as the propellants; see Refs. 8-7 and 8-8. An experimental engine;
assembly (XRS-2200) with 20 cells and two hydrogen-cooled, two-dimensional,
curved ramps is shown in Figs 8-13 and 8-14. Each individual small (regen
eratively cooled) thrust chamber or cell has its own cylindrical combustion
chamber, a circular small nozzle throat, but a rectangular nozzle exit of low
area ratio. The gas from these 20 rectangular nozzle exits is further expanded
(and thus reaches a higher exhaust velocity) along the contour of the spike or
ramp. The two fuel-cooled side panels are not shown in these figures. The flat
surface at the bottom or base is porous or full of small holes and a low-pressure
gas flows through these openings. This causes a back pressure on the flat base
surface. This flow can be the exhaust gas from the turbopumps and is typically
1 or 2% of the total flow. The gas region below this base is enclosed by the two
gas flows from the ramps and the two side plates and is essentially independent
of ambient pressure or altitude. Two of the XRS-2200 engine drive the X-33
wing shaped vehicle aimed at investigating a single stage to orbit concept.
The thrust F of this aerospike thrust chamber consists of (1) the axial
component thrusts of each of the little chamber modules, (2) the integral of
the pressures acting on the ramps over the axially projected area Aa normal to
the axis of the ramps, and (3) the pressure acting over the base area Abase·
(8-13)
m
Here () is the angle of the module nozzle axis to the centerline of the spike, is
the total propellant flow, v is the exhaust velocity of the module, A is the total
2 2
exit area of all the modules, p is the exhaust pressure at the exit of the module,
2
and p is the ambient pressure at the nozzle exit level. These expressions are a
3
simplified version of the thrust. Not included, for example, is the negative effect
of the slipstream of air around the engine (which causes a low-pressure region)
and the friction on the side plates; both actually decrease the thrust slightly.
e,
For each application there is an optimum angle an optimum ramp length, an
optimum ratio of the projected ramp area to the base area, and an optimum
base pressure, which is a function of the base flow.
The local gas pressures on the ramps are influenced by shock wave phenom
ena and change with altitude. Figure 8-14 shows a typical pressure distribution
on a typical ramp surface and the flow patterns for low and high altitude. The
hot gas flows coming out of the cell nozzles are turned into a nearly axial
direction by multiple expansion waves (shown as dashed lines), which cause
a reduction in pressure. At lower altitudes the turning causes compression
shock waves (represented as solid lines), which causes local pressures to rise.
The compression waves are reflected off the boundary between the hot gas jet
Ic\o)
QI)
Powerpack
Oxidizer thrust 1 Powerpack Oxidizer thrust ~---- isolation
vectoring control isolation vectoring control valve (LOX)
valve (2 places) valve (LOX) valve (2 places)
--~-Thrust cell
(10 ea. bank)
Oxidizer
turbopump
Heat exchanger ------Engine
base
Thrust, sea level/vacuum, lbf 206, 200/266, 000 Mixture ratio 0 /H 5.5
2 2
Specific impulse, SUvac.(sec) 340/429 Dimensions, (in.), aft end 46Wx88L
Chamber pressure, psia 854 forward end 133 W x 88 L
Height, in. 79H
FIGURE 8--13. Side view and oblique top view of the XRS-2200 aerospike linear rocket engine with 20 thrust cells and two curved fuel
cooled ramps. (Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power.)
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 299
Propellant
enters through
multiple injectors
Thruster
""· I module
Ramp wall pressure
Multiple \l ~
chambers?
Expansion Axial
waves Curved nozzle distance
ramp surface
Compression
Porous base plate
Conditions at low altitude
Ramp wall pressure
Axial
Boundary
distance
with air
/
Conditions at high altitude
FIGURE 8-14. Pressure profile and flow pattern along the ramp ofan aerospike nozzle.
and the ambient air stream, creating further expansion waves. At high altitude
there are no compression waves emanating from the ramp and the expanding
diverging flow exerts a decreasing pressure on the ramp area and behaves very
similarly to the diverging nozzle flow in a bell-shaped conventional nozzle exit
section. The contact locations, where the compression waves touch the ramp
surface, have higher local heat transfer than other areas on the ramp surface;
these locations move downstream as the vehicle gains altitude. The wave pat
terns and the pressure distribution on the spike or ramp surface can be deter
mined from computerized fluid dynamics programs or a method of
characteristics program.
The advantages claimed for a linear aerospike engine are these: (1) compared
to the axisymmetric rocket engine, it fits well into the trailing edge of a winged
or lifting body type vehicle and often has less engine and structural mass; (2) it
has altitude compensation and thus operates at optimum nozzle expansion and
300 THRUST CHAMBERS
highest possible performance at every altitude; (3) differential throttling of
certain sets of individual thruster modules allows pitch, yaw, and roll control
of the vehicle during powered flight, as explained in Chapter 16. There is no
gimbal joint, no movement of the nozzle, no actuators, and no actuator power
supply or strong structural locations for actuator side loads; (4 ) the truncated
aerospike is short and requires less vehicle volume and structures; and (5) the
engine structure can be integrated with the vehicle structure, avoiding a sepa
rate vehicle structure at or near the engines. The disadvantages include the lack
of proven flight experience, proven reliability and performance validation
(which are expected to happen soon), and a larger-than-usual surface area
subject to high heat transfer.
Low-Thrust Rocket Thrust Chambers or Thrusters
Spacecraft, certain tactical missiles, missile defense vehicles, and upper stages
of ballistic missiles often use special, multiple thrusters in their small, liquid
propellant rocket engines. They generally have thrust levels between about 0.5
and 10,000 N or 0.1 to 2200 !bf, depending on vehicle size and mission. As
mentioned in Chapter 4, they are used for trajectory corrections, attitude con
trol, docking, terminal velocity control in spacecraft or ballistic missiles, divert
or side movement, propellant settling, and other functions. Most operate with
multiple restarts for relatively short durations during a major part of their duty
cycle. As mentioned in Chapter 6, they can be classified into hot gas thrusters
(high-performance bipropellant with combustion temperatures above 2600 K
and ls of 200 to 325 sec), warm gas thrusters such as monopropellant hydrazine
( temperatures between 500 and 1600 K and ls of 18 to 245 sec), and cold gas
thrusters such as high-pressure stored nitrogen (200 to 320 K) with low specific
impules (40 to 120 sec).
A typical small thruster for bipropellant is shown in Fig. 8-15 and for
hydrazine monopropellant in Fig. 8-16. For attitude control angular motion
these thrust chambers are usually arranged in pairs as explained in Section 4.6.
The same control signal activates the valves for both units of such a pair. All
these small space rocket systems use a pressurized feed system, some with
positive expulsion provisions, as explained in Section 6.3. The vehicle mission
and the automatic control system of the vehicle often require irregular and
frequent pulses to be applied by pairs of attitude control thrust chambers,
which often operate for very short periods (as low as 0.01 to 0.02 sec). This
type of frequent and short-duration thrust application is also known as pulsed
thrust operation. For translation maneuvers a single thruster can be fired (often
in a pulsing mode) and the thrust axis usually goes through the center of
gravity of the vehicle. The resulting acceleration will depend on the thrust
and the location of the thruster on the vehicle; it can be axial or at an angle
to the flight velocity vector.
There is a performance degradation with decreasing pulse duration, because
propellants are used inefficiently during the buildup of thrust and the decay of
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 301
Columbium chamber with disilicide coating (0.003 in. thick)
5.25~,~---9.75-----~
Nozzle cut off
Monomethyl hyrazine Low density molded insulation
valve at angle to fit
vehicle contour
Injector design
Single doublet
0.039 oxidizer dia.
Electrical junction box
0.041 fuel dia.
Chamber pressure transducer
Heater
Leak detection device
2 Propellant valves
FIGURE 8-15. This radiation-cooled, insulated vernier thruster is one of several used
on the Reaction Control System of the Space Shuttle vehicle for orbit stabilization and
orientation, rendezvous or docking maneuvers, station keeping, deorbit, or entry. The
nozzle is cut off at an angle to fit the contour of the vehicle. Performance data are given
in Table 6--3. Operation can be in a pulse mode (firing durations between 0.08 and 0.32
sec with minimum offtime of 0.08 sec) or a steady-state mode (0.32 to 125 sec).
Demonstrated life is 23 hr of operation and more than 300,000 starts. (Courtesy of
Kaiser Marquardt Company and NASA.)
thrust, when they operate below full chamber pressure and the nozzle expan
sion characteristics are not optimum. The specific impulse suffers when the
pulse duration becomes very short. In Section 3-5 the actual specific impulse
of a rocket operating at a steady state was given at about 92% of theoretical
specific impulse. With very short pulses (0.01 sec) this can be lower than 50%,
and with pulses of 0.10 sec it can be around 75 to 88%. Also, the reproduci
bility of the total impulse delivered in a short pulse is not as high after pro
longed use. A preheated monopropellant catalyst bed will allow performance
improvement in the pressure rise and in short pulses.
One way to minimize the impulse variations in short pulses and to maximize
the effective actual specific impulse is to minimize the liquid propellant passage
volume between the control valve and the combustion chamber. The propellant
flow control valves for pulsing attitude control thrust chambers are therefore
often designed as an integral part of the thrust chamber-injector assembly, as
shown in Fig. 8-15. Special electrically actuated leakproof, fast-acting valves
with response times ranging from 2 to 25 msec for both the opening and closing
operation are used. Valves must operate reliably with predictable characteris
tics for perhaps 40,000 to 80,000 starts. This in turn often requires endurance
proof tests of 400,000 to 800,000 cycles.
302 THRUST CHAMBERS
Propellant injector
diffuser screens
20-30 mesh granules
iridum-alumina catalyst
40:1 nozzle, radiation cooled,
lnconel
screens
•
~~~:?
Porous disc
Etched microorifice
FIGURE 8-16. Typical hydrazine monopropellant small thrust chamber with catalyst
bed, showing different methods of injection.
Liquid storable bipropellants such as N 0 -monomethylhydrazine are used
2 4
when high performance is mandatory. Some have used ablative materials for
thrust chamber construction, as in the Gemini command module. The Space
Shuttle small thrusters use radiation cooling with refractory metals, as shown
in Fig. 8-15. A radiation cooled thruster is shown later in Fig. 8-18. Carbon
materials made of woven strong carbon fibers in a matrix of carbon have also
been used in radiation-cooled bipropellant thrusters.
Hydrazine monopropellant thrusters are used when system simplicity is
important and moderate performance is acceptable. They have a nontoxic,
clear, clean exhaust plume. Virtually all hydrazine monopropellant attitude
control rockets use finely dispersed iridium or cobalt deposited on porous
ceramic (aluminum oxide) substrate pellets 1.5 to 3 mm in diameter as a
catalyst. Figure 8-16 shows a typical design of the catalyst pellet bed in an
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 303
attitude control rocket designed for pulse and steady-state operation meeting a
specific duty cycle. Each injection hole is covered with a cylindrical screen
section which extends into a part of the catalyst bed and distributes the hydra
zine propellant. Fig. 8-16 also shows other successful types of hydrazine injec
tor. Several arrangements of catalyst beds are employed; some have spring
loading to keep the pellets firmly packed. Hydrazine monopropellant thrust
units range in size from 0.2 to 2500 N of thrust; the scaling procedure is
empirical and each size and design requires testing and retesting. The amount
of ammonia decomposition, shown in Fig. 7-3, can be controlled by the design
of the catalyst bed and its decomposition chamber.
Mechanical, thermal, and chemical problems arise in designing a catalyst
bed for igniting hydrazine, the more important of which are catalytic attrition
and catalyst poisoning. Catalytic attrition or physical loss of catalyst material
stems from motion and abrasion of the pellets, with loss of very fine particles.
Crushing of pellets can occur because of thermal expansion and momentary
overpressure spikes. As explained in Chapter 7, the catalyst activity can also
decline because of poisoning by trace quantities of contaminants present in
commercial hydrazine, such as aniline, monomethylhydrazine, unsymmetrical
dimethylhydrazine, sulfur, zinc, sodium, or iron. Some of these contaminants
come with the hydrazine and some are added by the tankage, pressurization,
and propellant plumbing in the spacecraft. The high-purity grade has less than
0.003% aniline and less than 0.005% carbonaceous material; it does not con
taminate catalysts. Catalyst degredation, regardless of cause, produces ignition
delays, overpressures, and pressure spikes, decreases the specific impulse, and
decreases the impulse duplicate bit per pulse in attitude control engines.
Figure 19--4 shows a combination of chemical monopropellant and electrical
propulsion. Electrical post-heating of the reaction gases from catalysis allows
an increase of the altitude specific impulse from 240 sec to about 290 or 300 sec.
A number of these combination auxiliary thrusters have successfully flown on a
variety of satellite applications and are particularly suitable for spacecraft
where electrical power is available and extensive short-duration pulsing is
needed.
Cold gas thrusters and their performance were mentioned in Section 6.8 and
their propellants and specific impulses are listed in Table 7-3. They are simple,
low cost, used with pressurized feed systems, used for pulsing operations, and
for low thrust and low total impulse. They can use aluminum or plastics for
thrusters, valves and piping. The Pegasus air-launched launch vehicle uses
them for roll control only. The advantages of cold gas systems are: (a) they
are very reliable and have been proven in space flights lasting more than 10
years; (b) the system is simple and relatively inexpensive; (c) the ingredients are
nontoxic; (d) no deposit or contamination on sensitive spacecraft surfaces, such
as mirrors; (e) they are very safe; and (t) capable of random pulsing. The
disadvantages are: (a) engines are relatively heavy with poor propellant mass
fractions (0.02 to 0.19); (b) the specific impulses and vehicle velocity increments
304 THRUST CHAMBERS
are low, when compared to mono- or bipropellant systems; and (c) relatively
large volumes.
Materials and Fabrication
The choice of the material for the inner chamber wall in the chamber and the
throat region, which are the critical locations, is influenced by the hot gases
resulting from the propellant combination, the maximum wall temperature, the
heat transfer, and the duty cycle. Table 8-3 lists typical materials for several
thrust sizes and propellants. For high-performance, high heat transfer, regen
eratively cooled thrust chambers a material with high thermal conductivity and
a thin wall design will reduce the thermal stresses. Copper is an excellent
conductor and it will not really oxidize in fuel-rich non-corrosive gas mixtures,
such as are produced by oxygen and hydrogen below a mixture ratio of 6.0.
The inner walls are therefore usually made of a copper alloy (with small addi
tions of zirconium, silver, or silicon), which has a conductivity not quite as
good as pure (oxygen-free) copper but has improved high temperature
strength.
Figure 8-17 shows a cross section of a cooling jacket for a large, regenera
tively cooled thrust chamber with formed tapered tubes that are brazed
together. The other fabrication technique is to machine nearly rectangular
grooves of variable width and depth into the surface of a relatively thick
contoured high-conductivity chamber and nozzle wall liner; the grooves are
then filled with wax and, by an electrolyte plating technique, a wall of nickel is
added to enclose the coolant passages (see Fig. 8-17). The wax is then melted
out. As with tubular cooling jackets, a suitable inlet and outlet manifolds are
needed to distribute and collect the coolant flow. The figure also shows the
locations of maximum wall temperature. For propellant combinations with
corrosive or aggressive oxidizers (nitric acid or nitrogen tetroxide) stainless
steel is often used as the inner wall material, because copper would chemically
react. The depth and width of milled slots ( or the area inside formed tubes)
vary with the chamber-nozzle profile and its diameters. At the throat region
the cooling velocity needs to be at its highest and therefore the cooling passage
cross section will be at its lowest.
The failure modes often are bulging on the hot gas side and the opening up
of cracks. During hot firing the strain at the hot surface can exceed the local
yield point, thus giving it a local permanent compressive deformation. With the
cooldown after operation and with each successive firing, some additional
yielding and further plastic deformation will occur until cracks form. With
successive firings the cracks can become deep enough for a leak and the thrust
chamber will then usually fail. The useful life of a metal thrust chamber is the
maximum number of firings (and sometimes also the cumulative firing dura
tion) without such a failure. The prediction of wall failures is not simple and
Refs. 8-5 and 8-6 explain this in more detail. Useful life can also be limited by
the storage life of soft components (0-rings, gaskets, valve stem lubricant) and,
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 305
TABLE 8-3. Typical Materials used in Several Common Liquid Propellant Thrust
Chambers
Cooling
Application Propellant Components Method Typical Materials
Bipropellant TC, Oxygen- C,N,E F Copper alloy
cooled, high pressure hydrogen
(Booster or upper F Transpiration cooled
stage) porous stainless
steel face. Structure
is stainless steel
Alternate E R Carbon fiber in a
carbon matrix, or
niobium
Alternate E T Steel shell with
ablative inner liner
Same Oxygen- C, N, E, I F Stainless steel with
hycrocarbon tubes or milled
or storable slots
propellant* Alternate E R Carbon fiber in a
carbon matrix, or
niobium
Alternate E T Steel shell with
ablative inner liner
Experimental TC All types C,N,E u Low carbon steel
(very limited
duration----only a
few seconds)
Small bipropellant All types C,N, E R Carbon fiber in
TC carbon matrix,
rhenium,
niobium
T Steel shell with
ablative inner linear
F Stainless steels,
titanium
Small monopropellant Hydrazine C, N, E, R Inconel, alloy steels
TC I F Stainless steel
Cold gas TC Compressed C, N, E, I u Aluminum, steel or
air, nitrogen plastic
*HN0 3 or N 20 4 oxidizer with N 2H 4, MMH, or UDMH as fuels (see Chapter 7). TC = thrust
chamber, C = chamber wall, N = nozzle convering section wall and throat region walls, E = walls
at exit region of diverging section of nozzle, I = injector face, F = fuel cooled (regenerative), R =
radiation cooled, U = uncooled, T = transient heat transfer or heat sink method (ablative
material).
306 THRUST CH-AMB-ERS -
Mt/led cooling
Electrodepos,ted channel
outer shell
-------------~--Inner wall
Hot combustion gas
Estimated
temperature
fd oi rs t ari bb ou vt eio n '
I
'
\ l l I I
,~'r,-:-,- -:,-,<C Isotherms (solid lines)
construction ~ Dashed lines indicate
~ direction of heat flux
Hottest areas
Hot gas flow Solder or braze
material fillet
FIGURE 8-17. Enlarged cross section of thrust chamber's regenerative cooling pas
sages for two types of design.
for small thrusters with many pulses, also the fatigue of valve seats. Therefore,
there is a maximum limit on the number of firings that such a thrust chamber
can withstand safely, and this limits its useful life (see Refs. 8-7 and 8-8).
For radiation cooling, several different carbon materials have worked in a
reducing, fuel-rich rocket atmosphere. At other gas mixtures they can oxidize
at the elevated temperatures when they glow red or white. They can be used at
wall temperatures up to perhaps 3300 K or 6000 R. Carbon materials and
ablative materials are used extensively in solid propellant rocket motors and
are discussed further in Chapter 14.
For some small radiation-cooled bipropellant thrusters with storable pro
pellants, such as those of the reaction control thrusters on the Space Shuttle
Orbiter, the hot walls are made of niobium coated with disilicide (up to 1120 K
8.2. COMBUSTION CHAMBER AND NOZZLE 307
or 2050 R). To prevent damage, a fuel-rich mixtures or film cooling is often
used. Rhenium walls protected by iridium coatings (oxidation resistant) have
come into use more recently and can be used up to about 2300 Kor 4100 R (see
Ref. 8-9). Other high temperature materials, such as tungsten, molybdenum,
alumina, or tantalum, have been tried, but have had problems in manufacture,
cracking, hydrogen embrittlement, and excessive oxidation.
A small radiation-cooled monopropellant thruster is shown in Fig. 8-16 and
a small radiation cooled bipropellant thruster in Fig. 8-18. This thruster's
injection has extra fuel injection holes (not shown in Fig. 8-18) to provide
film cooling to keep wall temperatures below their limits. This same thruster
will also work with hydrazine as the fuel.
Until recently it has not been possible to make large pieces of carbon
carbon material. This was one of the reasons why large nozzle sections and
integral nozzle-exit-cone pieces in solid motors were made from carbon phe
nolic cloth lay-ups. Progress in manufacturing equipment and technology has
now made it possible to build and fly larger c-c pieces. A three-piece extendible
c-c nozzle exit cone of 2.3 m (84 in.) diameter and 2.3 to 3 mm thickness has
recently flown on an upper-stage engine. This engine with its movable nozzle
Solenoid Unlike doublet pattern
operated injector with additional
fuel valve film coolant injection holes
near periphery
I
q
E
--------------------- - E
©
C')
<'i
Lower nozzle exit section, ;;;
Combustion
Solenoid titanium
chamber with integral
o oxp ide izr e/ rt ed1 cn oo az tz ele
d
t whr ito ha t ir, idrh iue mni um,
Upper
valve nozzle exit
!1
section,
I niobium with
disilicide coating _t_
Mounting
II
flange and
injector .• 551.94 mm
assembly 1
Thrust 100 ibf
Chamber pressure - 140 psia
Nozzle area ratio 250 to 375
Specific impulse up to 323 sec
Mass 10.5 lbm
FIGURE 8--18. Radiation-cooled reaction control thruster R-4D-l 5 uses nitrogen
tetroxide and monomethylhydrazine propellants. The large nozzle area ratio allows
good vacuum performance. It has three different nozzle materials, each with a lower
allowable temperature (Re 4000°F; Nb 3500°F; Ti 1300°F. (Courtesy of Kaiser
Marquardt Company.)
308 THRUST CHAMBERS
extension is shown in Fig. 8-19, its parameters are listed in Table 8-1, and its
testing is reported in Ref. 8--4.
The material properties have to be evaluated before a material can be
selected for a specific thrust chamber application. This evaluation includes
physical properties, such as tensile and compressive strengths, yield strength,
fracture toughness, modulus of elasticity (for determining deflections under
load), thermal conductivity (a high value is best for steady-state heat transfer),
coefficient of thermal expansion (some large thrust chambers grow by 3 to 10
mm when they become hot, and that can cause problems with their piping
connections or structural supports), specific heat (capacity to absorb thermal
energy), reflectivity (for radiation), or density (ablatives require more volume
than steel). All these properties change with temperature (they are different
when they are hot) and sometimes they change with little changes in composi
tion. The temperature where a material loses perhaps 60 to 75% of its room
temperature strength is often selected as the maximum allowable wall tempera
ture, well below its melting point. Since a listing of all the key properties of a
single material requires many pages, it is not possible to list them here, but they
are usually available from manufacturers and other sources. Other important
properties are erosion resistance, little or no chemical reactions with the pro
pellants or the hot gases, reproducible decomposition or vaporization of abla
tive materials, ease and low cost of fabrication (welding, cutting, forming, etc.),
the consistency of the composition (impurities) of different batches of each
material (metals, organics, seals, insulators, lubricants, cleaning fluids), and
ready availability and low cost of each material.
8.3. HEAT TRANSFER ANALYSIS
In actual rocket development not only is the heat transfer analyzed but the
rocket units are almost always tested to assure that heat is transferred satis
factorily under all operating and emergency conditons. Heat transfer calcula
tions are useful to guide the design, testing, and failure investigations. Those
rocket combustion devices that are regeneratively cooled or radiation cooled
can reach thermal equilibrium and the steady-state heat transfer relationships
will apply. Transient heat transfer conditions apply not only during thrust
buildup (starting) and shutdown of all rocket propulsion systems, but also
with cooling techniques that never reach equilibriurm; such as with ablative
materials.
Sophisticated finite element analysis (FEA) programs of heat transfer have
been available for at least a dozen years and several different FEA computer
programs have been used for the analysis of thrust chamber steady-state and
transient heat transfer, with different chamber geometries or different materials
with temperature variant properties. A detailed description of this powerful
analysis is beyond the scope of this book, but can be found in Refs. 8-10 and
8-11. Major rocket propulsion organizations have developed their own ver-
8.3. HEAT TRANSFER ANALYSIS 309
Nozzle extension device (motors) Gimbal mount
Oxidizer-L0 inlet
2
Regeneratively
!-HH!--+-- cooled chamber
and nozzle
Turbine /t.~~E~~,J---=\--
discharge Propellant
line coo Id own
lines
Fixed nozzle _ _,__,___.
extension Movable
nozzle extension
(a) Half section of nozzle extension in stowed position
Nozzle extension device (motors)
Regeneratively cooled
chamber and nozzle
Nozzle extension
parameters:
Height: 2.5 m
(all 3 segments)
Max. diameter: 2.1 m
Material thickness: Fixed nozzle extension
2.310 3.0 mm (carbon-carbon)
I
Mass: 92 kg
Joint and seal
- -1--- Two-piece
nozzle extension.
Exit segment
(carbon-carbon)
(b) Nozzle extension in deployed position
FIGURE 8-19. The RL-lOB-2 rocket engine has an extendible nozzle cone or skirt,
which is placed around the engine during the ascent of the Delta III launch vehicle. This
extension is lowered into position by electromechanical devices after the launch vehicle
has been separated from the upper stage at high altitude and before firing. (Courtesy of
Pratt & Whitney, a division of United Technologies.)
310 THRUST CHAMBERS
sions of suitable computer programs for solving their heat transfer problems.
This section gives the basic relationships that are the foundation for FEA
programs. They are intended to give some understanding of the phenomena
and underlying principles.
General Steady-State Heat Transfer Relations
For heat transfer conduction the following general relation applies:
Q dT b..T
-=-K-=-K- (8-14)
A dL L
where Q is the heat transferred per unit across a surface A, dT/dL the tem
perature gradient with respect to thickness L at the surface A, and K the
thermal conductivity expressed as the amount of heat transferred per unit
time through a unit area of surface for 1° temperature difference over a unit
wall thickness. The negative sign indicates that temperature decreases as thick
ness increases.
The steady-state heat transfer through the chamber wall of a liqud-cooled
rocket chamber can be treated as a series type, steady-state heat transfer pro
blem with a large temperature gradient across the gaseous film on the inside of
the chamber wall, a temperature drop across the wall, and, in cases of cooled
chambers, a third temperature drop across the film of the moving cooling fluid.
It is a combination of convection at the boundaries of the flowing fluids and
conduction through the chamber walls. The problem is basically one of heat
and mass transport associated with conduction through a wall. It is shown
schematically in Fig. 8-20.
The general steady-state heat transfer equations for regeneratively cooled
thrust chambers can be expressed as follows:
q = h(Tg - T 1) = Q/A (8-15)
Tg-Tt
(8-16)
1/hg + ! ./K + 1/ht
11
= hg(T 0 - T.,.g) (8-17)
= (K/lw)(T.,.g - T,,.i) (8-18)
= hi(T 111 - T 1) (8-19)
where q is heat transferred per unit area per unit time, Tg the absolute chamber
gas temperature, T the absolute coolant liquid temperature, Tw, the absolute
1
wall temperature on the liquid side of the wall, Twg the absolute wall tempera
ture on the gas side of the wall, h the overall film coefficient, hg the gas film
coefficient, h the coolant liquid film coefficient, t ... the thickness of the chamber
1
wall, and K the conductivity of the wall material. The strength and thermal
properties of materials are functions of temperature. Any consistent set of units
8.3. HEAT TRANSFER ANALYSIS 311
Coolant fluid films ____L_
Inner wall-!--;>-V,,+-,
Gas film
Coolant fluid ~+---
Outer wall
Tg (3000 K)
--~
Atmosphere
Twg (700 K) _1
Twz (530 K)
-~T1 (420 K)
- (340 K)
Ambient air
temperature
Radial distance from center line of thrust chamber (294 K)
FIGURE 8-20. Temperature gradients in cooled rocket thrust chamber. The listed
temperatures are typical.
can be used in these equations. These simple relations assume that the he3:t flow
is radial. The simple quasi-one-dimensional theory also often assumes that the
thermal conductivity and the film coefficients are at average values and not
functions of temperature or pressure. A two- or three-dimensional finite ele
ment model would also need to be used to analyze the heat transfer in the axial
directions, which usually occurs in the nozzle throat wall regions; some of the
heat from the hot nozzle insert is transferred to wall regions upstream and
downstream of the insert.
Because the film coefficients, the gas and liquid coolant temperatures, the
wall thickness, and the surface areas usually vary with the axial distance within
a combustion chamber (assuming axial heat transfer symmetry), the total heat
transfer per unit time Q can be found by integrating the local heat transfer over
the entire internal surface area of the chamber and the nozzle:
f f
Q = q dA = rr Dq dL (8-20)
Because both q and D are complicated functions of L, the equation usually
has to be solved by dividing the rocket chamber into finite lengths. Assuming
that q is given by Eqs. 8-15 to 8-19 and remains constant over the length of
each element gives an approximate solution.
The important quantities for controlling the heat transfer across a rocket
chamber wall are the fluid film boundaries established by the combustion
products on one side of the wall and the coolant flow on the other. The gas
film coefficient largely determines the numerical value of the heat transfer rate,
and the liquid film largely determines the value of the wall temperatures. The
312 THRUST CHAMBERS
determination of the film coefficients in Eqs. 8-17 and 8-19 is difficult because
of the complex geometries, the nonuniform velocity profile, the surface rough
ness, the boundary layer behavior, and the combustion oscillations.
Conventional heat transfer theory is usually given in terms of several dimen
sionless parameters (Ref. 8-10):
hgD (Dvp)o.s (f.iCp)o.4
-=0.026 - - (8-21)
K µ K
where hg is the film coefficient, D the diameter of the chamber of the nozzle, v
the calculated average local gas velocity, K the conductivity of the gas, µ the
absolute gas viscosity, cP the specific heat of the gas at constant pressure, and p
the gas density.
In Eq. 8-21 the quantity hgD/K is known as the Nusselt number, the quan
tity Dvp/ µ as the Reynolds number, and the quantity cpµ/ K as the Prandtl
number Pr. The gas film coefficient hg can be determined from Eq. 8-21:
(8-22)
where pv is the local mass velocity, and the constant 0.026 is dimensionless. In
order to compensate for some of the boundary layer temperature gradient
effects on the various gas properties in rocket combustion, Bartz (Ref. 8-12)
has surveyed the agreement between theory and experiment and developed
semi-empirical correction factors:
(Cp/J.,0.2) (Pam) (µam)0.2
h = 0.026 (pv)°-8
(8-23)
g no.2 Pro.6 p' /.,lo
The subscript O refers to properties evaluated at the stagnation or combustion
temperature; the subscript am refers to properties at the arithmetic mean tem
perature of the local free-stream static temperature and the wall temperatures;
and p' is the free-stream value of the local gas density. Again, the empirical
constant 0.026 is dimensionless when compatible dimensions are used for the
other terms. The gas velocity v is the local free-stream velocity corresponding
to the density p'. Since density raised to the 0.8 power is roughly proportional
to the pressure and the gas film coefficient is roughly proportional to the heat
flux, it follows that the heat transfer rate increases approximately linearly with
the chamber pressure. These heat transfer equations have been validated for
common propellants, limited chamber pressure ranges, and specific injectors
(see Ref. 8-13).
The temperature drop across the inner wall and the maximum temperature
are reduced if the wall is thin and is made of material of high thermal con-
8.3. HEAT TRANSFER ANALYSIS 313
ductivity. The wall thickness is determined from strength considerations and
thermal stresses, and some designs have as little as 0.025 in. thickness.
Surface roughness can have a large effect on the film coefficients and thus on
the heat flux. Measurements have shown that the heat flow can be increased by
a factor of up to 2 by surface roughness and to higher factors when designing
turbulence-creating obstructions in the cooling channels. Major surface rough
ness on the gas side will cause the gas locally to come close to stagnation
temperature. However, surface roughness on the liquid coolant side of the
wall will enhance turbulence and the absorption of heat by the coolant and
reduce wall temperatures.
Example 8-1. The effects of varying the film coefficients on the heat transfer and the
wall temperatures are to be explored. The following data are given:
Wall thickness 0.445 mm
Wall material Low-carbon steel
Average conductivity 43.24 W/m2-K/m
Average gas temperature 3033 K or 2760°C
Average liquid bulk temperature 311.1 K or 37.8°C
Gas-film coefficient 147 W/m2-°C
Liquid-film coefficient 205,900 W/m2-°C
Vary hg (at constant h 1), then vary h 1 (at constant hg), and then determine the changes in
heat transfer rate and wall temperatures on the liquid and the gas side of the wall.
SOLUTION. Use Eqs. 8-16 to 8-19 and solve for q, T,,.g, and T"' 1• The answers shown
in Table 8-4 indicate that variations in the gas-film coefficient have a profound influence
on the heat transfer rate but relatively little effect on the wall temperature. The exact
opposite is true for variations in the liquid-film coefficient; here, changes in h produce
1
little change in q but a fairly substantial change in the wall temperature.
TABLE 8-4. Change in Film Coefficient
Change in
Film Coefficient(%) Change in Wall Temperature (K)
Heat Transfer
Gas Film Liquid Film (%) Gas Side, T"'g Liquid Side, T"
1
50 100 50 324.4 321.1
100 100 100 337.2 330.5
200 100 198 362.8 349.4
400 100 389 415.6 386.1
100 50 99 356.l 349.4
100 25 98 393.3 386.7
100 12.5 95 460.0 397.8
100 6.25 91 596.7 590.5
314 THRUST CHAMBERS
Transient Heat Transfer Analysis
An uncooled (high melting point) metal thrust chamber is the simplest type to
analyze, because there is no chemical change. Thermal equilibrium is not
reached. The uncooled walls act essentially as a heat sponge and absorb heat
from the hot gases. With the air of experimental data to determine some typical
coefficients, it is possible in some cases to predict the transient heating of
uncooled walls.
Heat is transferred from the hot gases to the wall, and during operation a
changing temperature gradient exists across the wall. The heat transferred from
the hot wall to the surrounding atmosphere, and by conduction of metal parts
to the structure, is negligibly small during this transient heating. Each local
point within the wall has its temperature raised as the burning process is
extended in time. After the completion of the rocket's operation, the wall
temperatures tend to equalize. A typical temperature-time-location history is
given in Fig. 8-21. Here the horizontal line at T = 21 °C denotes the initial
1000
900
800
700
600
I!!
~ 500 Typical equilibrium temperature
g]_ of wal! some time after rocket
E firing T = 357°C
,!!
400
300
200
100
3 4 5 6 8
Wal! posrtion number
-----Wal! thickness, 12.7 mm----
Heated Insulated
surface surface
FIGURE 8---21. Typical temperature distributions through a wall of an uncooled metal
thrust chamber as a function of heating time.
8.3. HEAT TRANSFER ANALYSIS 315
equilibrium condition of the wall before the rocket operates; the various curves
show the temperature profile across the wall at successive time intervals after
initiation of combustion. The line at T = 357°C shows an equilibrium tem
perature of the wall a finite time after cutoff.
The heat transferred across the hot surface of the wall (and distributed
within the wall by conduction) must be less than the heat-absorbing capacity
of the wall material below the critical temperature. If heat transfer to the out
side atmosphere and axially within the metal wall is neglected, this can be
expressed in a very simplified form:
Q !':..t = -KA(dT/dL)t:..t = mct:..T (8-24)
where Q is the heat per second transferred across area A. Eq. 8~ 17 shows that
QI A depends on the hot gas temperature, the wall temperature, and the gas
film coefficient. The heat conductivity K depends on the material and its tem
perature; t:..T denotes the average wall temperature increment; dT/dL the
temperature gradient of the heat flow near the hot wall surface in degrees
per unit thickness; m the mass of a unit area of wall; c the average specific
heat of the wall material; and !':..t at the time increment. The chamber and
nozzle walls can be divided into cylindrical or conical segments, and each
wall segment in turn is divided into an arbitrary number of axisymmetric
concentric layers, each of a finite thickness. At any given time the heat con
ducted from any one layer of the wall exceeds the heat conducted into the next
outer layer by the amount of heat absorbed in raising the temperature of the
particular layer. This iterative approach lends itself readily to two- or three
dimensional computer analysis, resulting in data similar to Fig. 8~21. It is
usually sufficient to determine the heat transfer at the critical locations, such
as in the nozzle throat region.
A more complex three-dimensional analysis can also be undertaken; here the
wall geometry is often more complex than merely cylindrical, heat is conducted
also in directions other than normal to the axis, temperature variable proper
ties are used, boundary layer characteristics vary with time and location, and
there may be more than one material layer in the wall.
A number of mathematical simulations of transient heat transfer in ablative
materials have been derived, many with limited success. This approach should
include simulation for the pyrolysis, chemical decomposition, char depth, and
out-gassing effects on film coefficient, and it requires good material property
data. Most simulations require some experimental data.
Steady-State Transfer to Liquids in Cooling Jacket
The term regenerative cooling is used for rockets where one of the propellants is
circulated through cooling passages around the thrust chamber prior to the
injection and burning of this propellant in the chamber. It is really forced
convection heat transfer. The term regenerative is perhaps not altogether
316 THRUST CHAMBERS
appropriate here, and it bears little relation to the meaning given to it in steam
turbine practice. It is intended to convey the fact that the heat absorbed by the
coolant propellant is not wasted but augments its initial temperature and raises
its energy level before it passes through the injector. This increase in the inter
nal energy of the liquid propellant can be calculated as a correction to the
enthalpy of the propellant (see Chapter 5). However, the overall effect on
rocket performance is usually very slight. With some propellants the specific
impulse can be 1% larger if the propellants are preheated through a tempera
ture differential of 100 to 200°C. In hydrogen-cooled thrust chambers and in
small combustion chambers, where the wall-surface-to-chamber volume ratio is
relatively large, the temperature rise in the regenerative coolant will be high,
and the resulting increase in specific impulse is sometimes more than 1% .
The behavior of the liquid film is critical for controlling the wall tempera
tures in forced convection cooling of rocket devices at high heat fluxes (see
Table 8----4 and Refs. 8-14 and 8-15). At least four different types of film appear
to exit, as can be interpreted from Fig. 8-22. Here the heat transfer rate per
unit of wall surface is shown as a function of the difference between the wall
temperature on the liquid side Twt and the bulk temperature of the liquid Ti-
1. The normal forced convection region at low heat flux appears to have a
liquid boundary layer of predictable characteristics. It is indicated by
region A-B in Fig. 8-22. Here the wall temperature is usually below
the boiling point of the liquid at the cooling jacket pressure. In steady
state heat transfer analysis the liquid film coefficient can be approximated
by the usual equation (see Refs. 8-10 and 8-12):
E
q
A
Tw1-T1 (log scale)
FIGURE 8-22. Regimes in transferring heat from a hot wall to a flowing liquid.
8.3. HEAT TRANSFER ANALYSIS 317
· (D )-02( )-2/3
:P ·
h = o.023c: :c (8-25)
1
where mis the fluid mass flow rate, cits average specific heat, A the cross
sectional flow area, D the equivalent diameter of the coolant passage
cross section,* v the fluid velocity, p the coolant density, µ its absolute
viscosity, and Kits conductivity. Many liquid-cooled rocket devices oper
ate in this regime of heat transfer. Values of the physical properties of
several propellants are given in Tables 8-5 and 7-1. In Table 8-5 it can be
seen that hydrazine is a good heat absorber, but kerosene is poor.
2. When the wall temperature T,!'! exceeds the boiling point of the liquid by
perhaps 10 to 50 K, small vapor bubbles form at the wall surface. These
small, nuclei-like bubbles cause local turbulence, break away from the
wall, and collapse in the cooler liquid. This phenomenon is known as
nucleate boiling. The turbulence induced by the bubbles changes the
character of the liquid film and, augmented by the vaporization of
some of the propellant, the heat transfer rate is increased without a
proportional increase in the temperature drop across the film, as can
be seen by the steep slope B-C of the curve in Figure 8-22. If the pressure
of the fluid is raised, then the boiling point is also raised and the nucleate
TABLE 8-5. Heat Transfer Characteristics of Several Liquid Propellants
Boiling
Characteristics Nucleate Boiling Characteristics
Boiling Critical Critical
Liquid Pressure Temp. Temp. Pressure Temp. Pressure Velocity qmax
Coolant (MPa) (K) (K) (MPa) (K) (MPa) (m/sec) (MW/m2 )
Hydrazine 0.101 387 652 14.7 322.2 4.13 10 22.1
0.689 455 20 29.4
3.45 540 405.6 4.13 10 14.2
6.89 588 20 21.2
Kerosene 0.101 490 678 2.0 297.2 0.689 I 2.4
0.689 603 8.5 6.4
1.38 651 297.2 1.38 1 2.3
1.38 651 8.5 6.2
Nitrogen tetroxide 0.101 294 431 IO.I 288.9 4.13 20 11.4
0.689 342 322.2 9.3
4.13 394 366.7 6.2
Unsymmetrical 0.101 336 522 6.06 300 2.07 10 4.9
dimethyl 1.01 400 20 7.2
hydrazine 3.45 489 300 5.52 10 4.7
*The grooves, tubes, or coolant passages in liquid propellant rocket chambers are often of complex
cross section. The equivalent diameter, needed for fluid-film heat transfer calculations, is usually
defined as four times the hydraulic radius of the coolant passage; the hydraulic radius is the cross
sectional flow area divided by the wetted perimeter.
318 THRUST CHAMBERS
boiling region shifts to the right, to B'-C'. This boiling permits a sub
stantial increase in the heat transfer beyond that predicted by Eq. 8-25.
This phenomenon often occurs locally in the nozzle throat area, where
the heat flux is high.
3. As the heat transfer is increased further, the rate of bubble formation and
the bubble size become so great that the bubbles are unable to escape
from the wall rapidly enough. This reaction (shown as C-D in Fig. 8-22)
is characterized by an unstable gas film and is difficult to obtain repro
ducibly in tests. When a film consisting largely or completely of gas forms
along the hot wall surface, then this film acts as an insulation layer,
causing a decrease in heat flux and, usually, a rapid increase in wall
temperature, often resulting in a burnout or melting of the wall material.
The maximum feasible heat transfer rate (point C) is indicated as qmax in
Table 8-5 and appears to be a function of the cooling-fluid properties,
the presence of dissolved gases, the pressure, and the flow velocity.
4. As the temperature difference across the film is further increased, the wall
temperatures reach values in which heat transfer by radiation becomes
important. Region D-E is not of interest to rocket designers.
Cooling can also be accomplished by a fluid above its critical point with
coolants such as hydrogen. In this case there is no nucleate boiling and the heat
transfer increases with the temperature difference, as shown by the supercritical
(dashed) line in Fig. 8-22. Liquid hydrogen is an excellent coolant, has a high
specific heat, and leaves no residues.
Chemical changes in the liquid can seriously influence the heat transfer from
hot walls to liquids. Cracking of the fuel, with an attendant formation of
insoluble gas, tends to reduce the maximum heat flux and thus promote failure
more readily. Hydrocarbon fuel coolants (methane, jet fuel) can break down
and form solid, sticky carbon deposits inside the cooling channel, impeding the
heat transfer. Other factors influencing steady-state coolant heat transfer are
gas radiation to the wall, bends in the coolant passage, improper welds or
manufacture, and flow oscillations caused by turbulence or combustion un
steadiness. Some propellants, such as hydrazine, can decompose spontaneously
and explode in the cooling passage if they become too hot.
To achieve a good heat-absorbing capacity of the coolant, the pressure and
the coolant flow velocity are selected so that boiling is permitted locally but the
bulk of the coolant does not reach this boiling condition. The total heat
rejected by the hot gases to the surface of the hot walls, as given by Eq.
8-15 must be less than that permitted by the temperature rise in the coolant,
namely
(8-26)
where riz is the coolant mass flow rate, c the average specific heat of the liquid,
T the initial temperature of the coolant as it enters the cooling jacket, and T
1 2
8.3. HEAT TRANSFER ANALYSIS 319
its final temperature. Q is the rate of heat absorption per unit time; q is this
same rate per unit heat transfer area. A. T should be below the boiling point
2
prevailing at the cooling jacket pressure.
Radiation
Radiation heat emission is the electromagnetic radiation emitted by a gas,
liquid, or solid body by the virtue of its temperature and at the expense of
its internal energy. It covers the wavelength range from 10,000 to 0.0001 µ,m,
which includes the visible range of 0.39 to 0. 78 µ,m. Radiation heat transfer
occurs most efficiently in a vacuum because there is no absorption by the
intervening fluids.
The heat transmitted by the mechanism of radiation depends primarily on
the temperature of the radiating body and its surface condition. The second
law of thermodynamics can be used to prove that the radiant energy E is a
function of the fourth power of the absolute temperature T:
E =fwAT4 (8-27)
The energy E radiated by a body is defined as a function of the emissivity E,
which is a dimensionless factor for surface condition and material properties,
the Stefan-Boltzmann constant u (5.67 x 10-s W/m2-K4 ), the surface area A,
the absolute temperature T, and the geometric factor f, which depends on the
arrangement of adjacent parts and the shape. At low temperatures (below 800
K) radiation accounts for only a negligible portion of the total heat transfer in
a rocket device and can usually be neglected.
In rocket propulsion there are these radiation concerns:
l. Emission of hot gases to the internal walls of a combustion chamber, a
solid propellant grain, a hybrid propellant grain or a nozzle.
2. Emission to the surroundings or to space from the external surfaces of
hot hardware (radiation-cooled chambers, nozzles, or electrodes in elec
tric propulsion).
3. Radiation from the hot plume downstream of the nozzle exit. This is
described in Chapter 18.
In rocket combustion devices gas temperatures are between 1900 and 3900
K or about 3000 to 6600°F; their radiation contributes between 3 and 40% of
the heat transfer to the chamber walls, depending on the reaction gas composi
tion, chamber size, geometry, and temperature. It can be a significant portion
of the total heat transfer. In solid propellant motors the radiation heating of
the grain surfaces can be critical to the burning rate, as discussed in Chapter 13.
The absorption of radiation on the wall follows essentially the same laws as
those of emission. Metal surfaces and formed tubes reflect much of the radiant
energy, whereas ablative materials and solid propellant seem to absorb most of
320 THRUST CHAMBERS
the incident radiation. A highly reflective surface on the inside wall of a com
bustor tends to reduce absorption and to minimize the temperature increase of
the walls.
The hot reaction gases in rocket combustion chambers are potent radiation
sources. Gases with symmetrical molecules, such as hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen, have been found not to show many strong emission bands in those
wavelength regions of importance in radiant heat transfer. Also, they do not
really absorb much radiation and do not contribute considerable energy to the
heat transfer. Heteropolar gases, such as water vapor, carbon monoxide, car
bon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, hydrocarbons, ammonia, oxides of nitrogen,
and the alcohols, have strong emission bands of known wavelengths. The
radiation of energy of these molecules is associated with the quantum changes
in their energy levels of rotation and interatomic vibration. In general, the
radiation intensity of all gases increases with their volume, partial pressure,
and the fourth power of their absolute temperature. For small thrust chambers
and low chamber pressures, radiation contributes only a small amount of
energy to the overall heat transfer.
If the hot reaction gases contain small solid particles or liquid droplets, then
the radiation heat transfer can increase dramatically by a factor of 2 to 10. The
particulates greatly increase the radiant energy as explained in Section 18.1.
For example, the reaction gas from some slurry liquid propellants and many
solid propellants contains fine aluminum powder. When burned to form alu
minum oxide, the heat of combustion and the combustion temperature are
increased (raising heat transfer), and the specific impulse is raised somewhat
(giving improved performance). The oxide can be in the form of liquid droplets
(in the chamber) or solid particles (in the nozzle diverging section), depending
on the local gas temperature. Furthermore, the impact of these particulates
with the wall will cause an additional increase in heat transfer, particularly to
the walls in the nozzle throat and immediately upstream of the nozzle throat
region. The particles also cause erosion or abrasion of the walls.
8.4. STARTING AND IGNITION
The starting of a thrust chamber has to be controlled so that a timely and even
ignition of propellants is achieved and the flow and thrust are built up
smoothly and quickly to their rated value (see Ref. 6-1). The initial propellant
flow is less than full.flow, and the starting mixture ratio is usually different from
the operating mixture ratio. A low initial flow prevents an excessive accumula
tion of unignited propellants in the chamber.
The starting injection velocity is low, the initial vaporization, atomization,
and mixing of propellants in a cold combustion chamber is incomplete, and
there are local regions of lean and rich mixtures. With cryogenic propellants
the initial chamber temperature can be below ambient. The optimum starting
mixture is therefore only an average of a range of mixture ratios, all of which
8.4. STARTING AND IGNITION 321
should be readily ignited. Mixture ratios near the stoichiometric mixture ratio
have a high heat release per unit of propellant mass and therefore permit
bringing the chamber and the gases up to equilibrium faster than would be
possible with other mixtures. The operating mixture ratio is usually fuel rich
and is selected for optimum specific impulse. One method of analytical model
ing of the ignition of cryogenic propellants is given in Ref. 8-16.
The time delay for starting a thrust chamber ideally consists of the following
time periods:
(1) time needed to fully open the propellant valves (typically 0.002 to more
than 1.00 sec, depending on valve type and its size and upstream pres
sure);
(2) time needed to fill the liquid passage volume between the valve seat and
the injector face (piping, internal injector feed holes, and cavities);
(3) time for forming discrete streams or jets of liquid propellant (sometimes
gaseous propellant, if cryogenic liquid is preheated by heat of ambient
temperature cooling jacket) and for initial atomization into small
droplets and for mixing these droplets;
(4) time needed for droplets to vaporize and ignite (laboratory tests show
this to be very short, 0.02 to 0.05 sec, but this depends on the propellants
and the available heat);
(5) once ignition is achieved at a particular location in the chamber, it takes
time to spread the flame or to heat all the mixed propellant that has
entered into the chamber, to vaporize it, and to raise it to ignition
temperature;
(6) time needed to raise the chamber to the point where combustion will be
self sustaining, and then to its full pressure.
There are overlaps in these delays and several of them can occur simulta
neously. The delays [items (1), (2), (3), (5), and (6) above] are longer with
large injectors or large diameter chambers. Small thrusters can usually be
started very quickly, in a few milliseconds, while larger units require 1 sec or
more.
In starting a thrust chamber one propellant always reaches the chamber a
short time ahead of the other; it is almost impossible to synchronize exactly the
fuel and oxidizer feed systems so that the propellants reach the chamber simul
taneously at all injection holes. Frequently, a more reliable ignition is assured
when one of the propellants is intentionally made to reach the chamber first.
For example, for a fuel-rich starting mixture the fuel is admitted first.
Reference 8-17 describes the control of the propellant lead.
Other factors influencing the starting flows, the propellant lead or lag, and
some of the delays mentioned above are the liquid pressures supplied to the
injector (e.g., regulated pressure), the temperature of the propellant (some can
be close to their vapor point), and the amount of insoluble gas (air bubbles)
mixed with the initial quantity of propellants.
322 THRUST CHAMBERS
The propellant valves (and the flow passages betwen them and the injector
face) are often so designed that they operate in a definite sequence, thereby
assuring an intentional lead of one of the propellants and a controlled buildup
of flow and mixture ratio. Often the valves are only partially opened, avoiding
an accumulation of hazardous unburned propellant mixture in the chamber.
Once combustion is established, the valves are fully opened and full flow may
reach the thrust chamber assembly. The initial reduced flow burning period is
called the preliminary stage. Section 10.5 describes the starting controls.
Full flow in the larger thrust chambers is not initiated with non-self-igniting
propellants until the controller received a signal of successful ignition. The
verification of ignition or initial burning is often built into engine controls
using visual detection (photocell), heat detection (pyrometer), a fusible wire
link, or sensing of a pressure rise. If the starting controls are not designed
properly, unburnt propellant may accumulate in the chamber; upon ignition
it may then explode, causing sometimes severe damage to the rocket engine.
Starting controls and engine flow calibrations are discussed in Section 10.5
Non-spontaneously ignitable propellants need to be activated by absorbing
energy prior to combustion initiation. This energy is supplied by the ignition
system. Once ignition has begun the flame is self-supporting. The igniter has to
be located near the injector in such a manner that a satisfactory starting mix
ture at low initial flow is present at the time of igniter activation, yet it should
not hinder or obstruct the steady-state combustion process. At least five dif
ferent types of successful propellant ignition systems have been used.
Spark plug ignition has been used successfully on liquid oxygen-gasoline and
on oxygen-hydrogen thrust chambers, particularly for multiple starts during
flight. The spark splug is often built into the injector, as shown in Fig. 9-6.
Ignition by electrically heated wires has been accomplished, but at times has
proven to be less reliable than spark ignition for liquid propellants.
Pyrotechnic ignition uses a solid propellant squib or grain of a few seconds'
burning duration. The solid propellant charge is electrically ignited and burns
with a hot flame within the combustion chamber. Almost all solid propellant
rockets and many liquid rocket chambers are ignited in this fashion. The igniter
container may be designed to fit directly onto the injector or the chamber (see
Fig. 8-1 ), or may be held in the chamber from outside through the nozzle. This
ignition method can only be used once; thereafter the charge has to be
replaced.
In precombustion chamber ignition a small chamber is built next to the main
combustion chamber and connected through an orifice; this is similar to the
precombustion chamber used in some internal combustion engines. A small
amount of fuel and oxidizer is injected into the precombustion chamber and
ignited. The burning mixture enters the main combustion chamber in a torch
like fashion and ignites the larger main propellant flow which is injected into
the main chamber. This ignition procedure permits repeated starting of vari
able-thrust engines and has proved successful with the liquid oxygen-gasoline
and oxygen-hydrogen thrust chambers.
8.5. VARIABLE THRUST 323
Auxiliary fluid ignition is a method whereby some liquid or gas, in addition
to the regular fuel and oxidizer, is injected into the combustion chamber for a
very short period during the starting operation. This fluid is hypergolic, which
means it produces spontaneous combustion with either the fuel or the oxidizer.
The combustion of nitric acid and some organic fuels can, for instance, be
initiated by the introduction of a small quantity of hydrazine or aniline at
the beginning of the rocket operation. Liquids that ignite with air (zinc diethyl
or aluminum triethyl), when preloaded in the fuel piping, can accomplish a
hypergolic ignition. The flow diagram of the RD 170 Russian rocket engine in
Fig. I 0-10 shows several cylindrical containers prefilled with a hypergolic
liquid, one for each of the high pressure fuel supply lines; this hypergolic liquid
is pushed out (by the initial fuel) into the thrust chambers and into the pre
burners to start their ignitions.
In vehicles with multiple engines or thrust chambers it is required to start
two or more together. It is often difficult to get exactly simultaneous starts.
Usually the passage or manifold volumes of each thrust chamber and their
respective values are designed to be the same. The temperature of the initial
propellant fed to each thrust chamber and the lead time of the first quantity of
propellant entering into the chambers have to be controlled. This is needed, for
example, in two small thrusters when used to apply roll torques to a vehicle. It
is also one of the reasons why large space launch vehicles are not released from
their launch facility until there is assurance that all the thrust chambers are
started and operating.
8.5. VARIABLE THRUST
Section 3.8 mentions the equations related to this topic. One of the advantages
of liquid propellant rocket engines is the ability to throttle or to randomly vary
the thrust over a wide range. Deep throttling over a thrust range of more than
I 0: 1 is required for relatively few applications. Moon landing, interceptor
missiles, and gas generators with variable power output are examples.
Moderate throttling (a thrust range of up to perhaps 2.5: I) is needed for
trajectory velocity control (as in some tactical missiles), space maneuvers, or
temporarily limiting the vehicle velocity (to avoid excessive aerodynamic heat
ing during the ascent through the atmosphere), as in the Space Shuttle main
engine.
Throttling is accomplished by reducing the propellant flow supply to the
thrust chamber and thus reducing the chamber pressure. The pressure drop in
the injector is related to the injection velocity by Eq. 8-5. The accompanying
reduction of the injector pressure drop can lead to a very low liquid injection
velocity and, thus, to poor propellant mixing, improper stream impingement
patterns, and poor atomization, which in turn can lead to lower combustion
efficiency and thus lower performance and sometimes unstable combustion.
324 THRUST CHAMBERS
The variation of flow through a given set of injection orifices and of thrust by
this method is limited.
There are several throttling methods whereby the injection pressure drop is
not decreased unduly. This permits a change in chamber pressure without a
major decrease in injector pressure drop. A moving sleeve· mechanism for
adjusting the fuel and the oxidizer injection circular sheet spray areas is
shown in Fig. 8-3.
One way of preventing unstable operation and a drop-off in performance is
to use multiple thrust chambers or multiple rocket engines, each of which oper
ates always at or near rated conditions. The thrust is varied by turning indivi
dual thrust chambers on or off and by throttling all of them over a relatively
narrow range.
For small reaction control thrusters the average thrust is usually reduced by
pulsing. It is accomplished by controlling the number of cycles or pulses (each
has one short fixed-duration thrust pulse plus a short fixed-duration zero
thrust pause), by modulating the duration of individual pulses (with short
pauses between pulses), or alternatively by lengthening the pause between
pulses.
8.6. SAMPLE THRUST CHAMBER DESIGN ANALYSIS
This example shows how a thrust chamber is strongly influenced by the overall
vehicle system requirements or the mission parameters and the vehicle design.
As outlined in the Design Section of Chapter 10 and in the discussion of the
selection of propulsion systems in Chapter 17, each engine goes through a
series of rationalizations and requirements that define its key parameters and
its design. In this example we describe how the thrust chamber parameters are
derived from the vehicle and engine requirements. The overall system require
ments relate to the mission, its purpose, environment, trajectories, reusability,
reliability, and to restraints such as allowable engine mass, or maximum
dimensional envelope. We are listing some, but not all of the requirements.
It shows how theory is blended with experience to arrive at the initial choices of
the design parameters.
Here we define the application as a new upper stage of an existing multistage
space launch vehicle, that will propel a payload into deep space. This means
continuous firing (no restart or reuse), operating in the vacuum of space (high
nozzle area ratio), modest acceleration (not to exceed 5 g 0), low cost, moder
ately high performance (specific impulse), and a thrust whose magnitude
depends on the payloads, the flight path and acceleration limits. The desired
mission velocity increase of the stage is 3400 m/sec. The engine is attached to its
own stage, which is subsequently disconnected and dropped from the payload
stage. The payload stage (3500 kg) consists of a payload of 1500 kg (for
scientific instruments, power supply, or communications and flight control
equipment) and its own propulsion systems (including propellant) of 2000 kg
8.6. SAMPLE THRUST CHAMBER DESIGN ANALYSIS 325
(for trajectory changes, station keeping, attitude control, or emergency man
euvers). There are two geometric restraints: the vehicle has an outside diameter
of 2.0 m, but when the structure, conduits, certain equipment, thermal insula
tion, fittings, and assembly are considered, it really is only about 1.90 m. The
restraint on the stage length of 4.50 m maximum will affect the length of the
thrust chamber. We can summarize the key requirements:
Application Uppermost stage to an existing multistage
launch vehicle
Payload 3500 kg
Desired velocity increase t;.u 3400 m/sec in gravity free vacuum
Maximum stage diameter 1.90 m
Maximum stage length 4.50 m
Maximum acceleration 5 go
Decisions on Basic Parameters. The following engine design decisions or
parameter selection should be made early in the design process:
Propellant combination
Chamber pressure
Nozzle area ratio
Feed system, using pumps or pressurized tanks
Thrust level
From a performance point of view, the best propellant combination would be
liquid oxygen with liquid hydrogen. However, this bipropellant would have a
low average specific gravity (0.36), a very large liquid hydrogen tank, and
would cause an increase in vehicle drag during ascent. It would have some
potential problems with exceeding the allocated stage volume, hydrogen mass
losses, and the vehicle structure. The lower stages of the existing launch vehicle
use liquid oxygen with RP-I fuel with an average specific gravity of about
1.014, and the launch pad is already equipped for supplying these. The new
stage is limited in volume and cross section. Because of these factors the
propellant combination of liquid oxygen and RP-1 (a type of kerosene) is
selected. From Fig. 5-1 we see that the theoretical specific impulse is between
280 and 300 sec, depending on the mixture ratio and whether we use frozen or
shifting chemical equilibrium in the nozzle flow expansion. This figure also
shows that the maximum value of the characteristic velocity c* is reached at
a mixture ratio of about 2.30, which is a fuel-rich mixture. We select this
mixture ratio. Its combustion temperature is lower than the mixture ratios
with higher values, and this should make the cooling of the thrust chamber
easier. We will see later that cooling may present some problems. Based on
universal experience, we select a value of / part way (about 40%) between the
5
values for frozen and shifting equilibrium, namely 292 sec at the standard
chamber pressure of 1000 psi or 6.895 MPa, and a nozzle big enough for
expansion to sea level. From Fig. 5-1 and Table 5-5 we find the molecular
326 THRUST CHAMBERS
mass to be 23 kg/kg-mo! and the specific heat ratio k to be about 1.24. Later we
will correct this value of ls from this standard reference condition to the actual
vacuum specific impulse of the thrust chamber.
Next we will select a chamber pressure, a nozzle area ratio and a feed system
concept. Historically there has been favorable experience with this propellant
combination at chamber pressures between 400 and 3400 psia with nozzle area
ratios up to about 40 with both gas generator cycles and staged combustion
cycles, giving proof that this is feasible. The following considerations enter into
this selection:
1. Higher chamber pressures allow a smaller thrust chamber and (for the
same nozzle exit pressure) a shorter nozzle cone with a smaller nozzle exit
diameter. The thrust chamber is small enough for a toroidal tank to be
built around it, and this conserves stage length. This not only saves
vehicle space, but usually also some inert mass in the vehicle and the
engine. Figure 8-23 shows the relative sizes of thrust chambers for three
chamber pressures and two nozzle area ratios (E of 100 and 300). The
nozzle length and exit diameter cannot exceed the values given in the
requirements, which, as can be seen, rules out low chamber pressure or
high area ratio. The dimensions shown are calculated later in this
analysis.
p 1 = 8.962 MPa p 1 = 4.826 MPa p 1 = 0.689 MPa
(1300 psia) (700 psia) (100 psia)
~)\~m
''JdL
2.54m
3.32 m
0 = 0.60 m
100
0 = 1.05 m
300 0 = 0.835 m
100
Oaao=1.44m 7.1m
0 = 3.79 m
300
FIGURE 8-23. Comparison of thrust chamber sizes for three chamber pressures and
two nozzle area ratios (100 and 300).
8.6. SAMPLE THRUST CHAMBER DESIGN ANALYSIS 327
2. The heat transfer rate is almost proportional to the gas density, which is
proportional to the chamber pressure, as shown by Eq. 8-21 and 8-23.
On some prior thrust chambers there have been problems with the for
mation of solid carbon layer or deposits either inside the cooling jacket
(increasing wall temperatures) or on the inner walls of the combustion
chamber (the solid can flake off and cause burnout). This favors a lower
chamber pressure.
3. Concern over leak-free seals for both static and dynamic seal increases
with chamber pressure, which in turn causes all feed presures also to
increase.
4. A feed system using pressurized gas is feasible, but its inert masses of
tanks and engine are favorable only, if the chamber pressure is very low,
perhaps around 100 psia or less. The tanks for propellants and pressur
izing gas become very heavy and the thrust chamber will be very large
and exceed the dimensional restraints mentioned above. We therefore
cannot use this feed system or very low chamber pressures.
5. If we use a pump feed system, the power needed to drive the pumps
increases directly with chamber pressure PI. In a gas generator engine
cycle this means a slightly reduced performance as the value of PI goes
up. For a staged combustion cycle it means high pressures, particu
larly high pressure hot gas flexible piping, and a more complex, hea
vier, and expensive engine. We therefore select a gas generator cycle
(see Fig. 1-4) at a low enough chamber pressure, so that the thrust
chamber (and the other inert hardware) will just fit the geometrical
constraints, and the engine inert mass and the heat transfer will be
reasonable.
For these reasons we pick a chamber pressure of 700 psia or 4.825 MPa
and an area ratio of 100. With further analysis we could have picked PI
more precisely; it could be somewhat lower or higher. Next we correct the
specific impulse to the operating conditions using a ratio of thrust coeffi
cients. We can use Eq. 3-30 or interpolate between Figs. 3-7 and 3-8 for a
value of k = 1.24. The reference or standard condition (see Fig. 3-6) is for a
pressure ratio pi/p of 1000/14.7 = 68, which corresponds to an area ratio
3
of about 8. Then (CF)standard = 1.58. For the actual high-altitude operation
the pressure ratio is close to infinity and the nozzle has an area ratio of 100;
we can determine the thrust coefficient by interpolating k = 1.24. The result
is (CF)vacuum = 1.90. The new ideal specific impulse value for a chamber
threshold of 700 psia and a nozzle area ratio of I 00 is therefore 292 x
(1.90/1.58) = 351.1 sec. In order to correct for losses (divergence, boundary
layer, incomplete combustion, some film cooling, etc.) we use a correction factor
of 0.96 giving a thrust chamber specific impulse of 337.1 sec. The engine uses a
gas generator and this will reduce the engine specific impulse further by a factor
of 0.98 or Us)engine = 330.3 sec or an effective exhaust velocity of 3237 m/sec.
328 THRUST CHAMBERS
Stage Masses and Thrust Level. An estimate of the stage masses will
next be made. We assume that the inert hardware (tanks, gas, generator,
turbopumps, etc.) is about 7% of the propellant mass, which is conservative
when compared to existing engines. In a full-fledged engine design this
number would be verified or corrected once an estimated mass budget
becomes available. From Eq. 4--7
et;.u/v = mo = mp + 0.07mp + 3500 = e3400/3237
m1 0.07mP + 3500
Solve for mp = 7639 kg. The final and initial masses of the stage are then 4023
kg and 11,002 kg respectively.
The maximum thrust is limited by the maximum allowed acceleration of 5g 0.
It is Fmax = m a= 11,002 x 5 x 9.8 = 539,100 N. This would become a rela
0
tively large and heavy thrust chamber. Considerable saving in inert mass can be
obtained if a smaller thrust size (but longer firing duration) is chosen. Since this
same thrust chamber is going to be used for another mission where an accel
eration of somewhat less than 1.0 g is wanted, a thrust level of 50,000 N or
0
11,240 !bf is chosen. The maximum acceleration of the stage occurs just before
cutoff; it is a= F/m 1 = 50,000/4023 = 12.4 m/sec2 or about 1.26 times the
acceleration of gravity. This fits the thrust requirements.
The following have now been determined:
Propellant Liquid oxygen and liquid kerosene
(RP-I)
Mixture ratio (0/F) 2.30 (engine)
Thrust 50,000 Nor 11,240 !bf
Chamber pressure 700 psia or 4.826 MPa
Nozzle area ratio 100
Specific impulse (engine) 330.3 sec
Specific impulse (thrust chamber) 337.1 sec
Engine cycle Gas generator
Usable propellant mass 7478 kg
Propellant Flows and Dimensions of Thrust Chamber. From Eq. 2-6
we obtain the propellant mass flow
m= F/c = 50,000/3200 = 15.625 kg/sec
When this total flow and the overall mixture ratio are known, then the fuel flow
m
and oxidizer flow 111 for the engine, its gas generator, and its thrust cham
1 0
ber can be determined from Eqs. 6-3 and 6--4 as shown below.
8.6. SAMPLE THRUST CHAMBER DESIGN ANALYSIS 329
riy = m/(r + I) = 15.446/(2.3 + I) = 4.680 kg/sec
ri1 = mr/(r +I)= (15.446 x 2.30)/3.30 = 10.765 kg/sec
0
The gas generator flow mgg consumes about 2.0% of the total flow and oper
ates at a fuel-rich mixture ratio of 0.055; this results in a gas temperature of
about 890 K.
(m1 )gg = 0.2928 kg/sec (mo)gg = 0.0161 kg/sec
The flows through the thrust chamber are equal to the total flow diminished
by the gas generator flow, which is roughly 98.0% of the total flow or 15.137
kg/sec.
(m1)tc = 4.387 kg/sec (mo)tc = 10.749 kg/sec
The duration is the total effective propellant mass divided by the mass flow rate
tb =mp/mp= 7478/15.446 = 484.1 sec or a little longer than 8 minutes
The nozzle throat area is determined from Eq. 3-31.
At= F/(p CF) = 50,000/(4.826 x 106 x 1.90) = 0.005453 m2 or 54.53 cm2
1
The nozzle throat diameter is Dt = 8.326 cm. The internal diameter of the
nozzle at exit A is determined from the area ratio of 100 to be D = ,Jloo x Dt
2 2
or 83.26 cm. A shortened or truncated bell nozzle (as discussed in Section 3.4)
will be used with 80% of the length of a 15° conical nozzle, but with the same
performance as a 15° cone. The nozzle length (from the throat to the exit) can be
determined by an accurate layout or by L = (D 2 - Dt)/(2 tan 15) as 139.8 cm.
For an 80% shortened bell nozzle this length would be about 111.8 cm. The
contour or shape of a shortened bell nozzle can be approximated by a parabola
(parabola equation is y2 = 2px). Using an analysis (similar to the analysis that
resulted in Fig. 3-14) the maximum angle of the diverging section at the inflec
tion point would be about 8; = 34° and the nozzle exit angle ee = 7°. The
approximate contour consists of a short segment of radius 0.4r of a 34°
1
included angle (between points T and I in Fig. 3-14) and a parabola with two
known points at I and E. Knowing the tangent angles (34 and 7°) and the y
coordinates LYe = r and Y; = rt + 0.382 r (I - cos 8;)] allows the determination
2 1
of the parabola by geometric analysis. Before detail design is undertaken, a
more accurate contour, using the method of characteristics, is suggested.
The chamber diameter should be about twice the nozzle throat diameter to
avoid pressure losses in the combustion chamber (De= 16.64 cm). Using the
approximate length of prior successful smaller chambers and a characteristic
length L* of about I.I m, the chamber length (together with the converging
nozzle section) is about 11.8 inch or 29.9 cm. The overall length of the thrust
330 THRUST CHAMBERS
chamber (169 cm) is the sum of the nozzle length (111.8 cm), chamber (29.9
cm), injector thickness (estimated at 8 cm), mounted valves (estimated at 10
cm), a support structure, and possibly also a gimbal joint. The middle sketch of
the three thrust chambers in Fig. 8-23 corresponds roughly to these numbers.
We have now the stage masses, propellant flows, nozzle and chamber con
figuration. Since this example is aimed at a thrust chamber, data on other
engine components or parameters are given only if they relate directly to the
thrust chamber or its parameters.
Next we check if there is enough available vehicle volume ( 1.90 m diameter
and 4.50 m long) to allow making a larger nozzle area ratio and thus gain a
little more performance. First we determine how much of this volume is occu
pied by propellant tanks and how much might be left over or be available for
the thrust chamber. This analysis would normally be done by tank design
specialists. The average density of the propellant mixture can be determined
from Eq. 7-1 to be 1014 kg/m3 and the total usable propellant of 7478 kg.
Using densities from Table 7-1 the fuel volume and the oxidizer volume can be
calculated to be 2.797 and 4.571 m3 respectively. For a diameter of 1.90 m, a
nearly spherical fuel tank, a separate oxidizer cylindrical tank with elliptical
ends, 6% ullage, and 2% residual propellant, a layout would show an overall
tank length of about 3.6 min a space that is limited to 4.50 m. This would leave
only 0.9 m for the length of the thrust chamber, and this is not long enough.
Therefore we would need to resort to a more compact tank arrangement, such
as using a common bulkhead between the two tanks or building a toroidal tank
around the engine. It is not the aim to design the tanks in this example, but the
conclusion affects the thrust chamber. Since the available volume of the vehicle
is limited, it is not a good idea to try to make the thrust chamber bigger.
This diversion into the tank design shows how a vehicle parameter affects
the thrust chamber design. For example, if the tank design would turn out to be
difficult or the tanks would become too heavy, then one of these thrust cham
ber options can be considered: (1) go to a higher chamber pressure (makes the
thrust chamber and nozzle smaller, but heavier), (2) go to a lower thrust engine
(will be smaller and lighter), (3) store the nozzle of the upper stage thrust
chamber in two pieces and assemble them once the lower stages have been
used and discarded (see Fig. 8-19; it is more complex and somewhat heavier),
or (4) use more than one thrust chamber in the engine (will be heavier, but
shorter). We will not pursue these or other options here.
Heat Transfer. The particular computer program for estimating heat
transfer and cooling parameters of thrust chambers will depend on the
background and experience of specific engineers and rocket organizations.
Typical computer programs divide the internal wall surface of the chamber
and nozzle into axial incremental axial steps. Usually in a preliminary
analysis the heat transfer is estimated only for critical locations such as for
the throat and perhaps the chamber.
8.6. SAMPLE THRUST CHAMBER DESIGN ANALYSIS 331
From Fig. 5-1 and Eq. 3-12 or 3-22 we determine the following gas tem
peratures for the chamber, nozzle throat region, and a location in the diverging
exit section. They are: T = 3600 K, T = 3243 K, and Te = 1730 K at an area
1 1
ratio of 6.0 in the diverging nozzle section. The chamber and nozzle down to an
exit area ratio of 6 will have to be cooled by fuel. For this propellant combina
tion and for the elevated wall temperatures a stainless steel has been success
fully used for the inner wall material.
Notice that beyond this area ratio of about 6, the nozzle free stream gas
temperatures are relatively low. Uncooled high temperature metals can be used
here in this outer nozzle region. Radiation cooling, using a material such as
niobium (coated to prevent excessive oxidation) or carbon fibers in a nonpor
ous carbon matrix, is suitable between an area ratio of 6 and about 25. For the
final large nozzle exit section, where the temperatures are even lower, a lower
cost material such as stainless steel or titanium is suggested. Ablative materials
have been ruled out, because of the long duration and the aggressive ingredi
ents in the exhaust gas. The gas compositions of Figs. 5-2 and 5-3 indicate that
some free oxygen and hydroxyl is present.
We now have identified the likely materials for key chamber components.
The best way to cool the radiation cooled exit segment of the nozzle (beyond
area ratio of 6) is to let it stick out of the vehicle structure; the heat can then be
freely radiated to space. One way to accomplish this, is to discard the vehicle
structure around the nozzle end.
As in Fig. 8-8, the maximum heat transfer rate will be at the nozzle throat
region. A variety of heat transfer analysis programs are available for estimating
this heat transfer. If a suitable computer program is not available, then an
approximate steady-state heat transfer analysis can be made using Eqs. 8-15
to 8-19 and the physical properties (specific heat, thermal conductivity, and
density) of RP-I at elevated temperatures. The film coefficients of Eqs. 8-23
and 8-25 are also needed. This is not done in this example, in part because data
tables for the physical properties would take up a lot of space and results are
not always reliable. Data from prior thrust chambers with the same propellants
indicate a heat transfer rate at the nozzle throat region exceeding IO Btu/in.2-
sec or 1.63 x 107 W/m2 .
The RP-I fuel is an unusual coolant, since it does not have a distinct boiling
point. Its composition is not consistent and depends on the oil stock from
which it was refined and the refining process. It is distilled or evaporated
gradually over a range of temperatures. The very hot wall can cause the RP
I to locally break down into carbon-rich material and to partially evaporate or
gasify. As long as the small vapor bubbles are recondensed when they are
mixed with the cooler portions of the coolant flow, a steady heat transfer
process will occur. If the heat transfer is high enough, then these bubbles
will not be condensed, may contain noncondensable gases, and the flow will
contain substantial gas bubbles and become unsteady, causing local overheat
ing. The recondensing is aided by high cooling passage velocities (more than
IO m/sec at the throat region) and by turbulence in these passages. A coolant
332 THRUST CHAMBERS
flow velocity of 15 m/sec is selected for the throat and 7 m/sec in the chamber
and nozzle exit segment.
The material for the cooling jacket will be stainless steel to resist the oxida
tion and erosion of the fast moving, aggressive hot gas, which contains free
oxygen and hydroxyl species. The cooling by fuel will assure that the tempera
tures of this stainless steel are well below its softening temperature of about
1050 K.
The construction of the cooling jacket can be tubular, as shown in Figs. 8-1
and 8-9, or it can consist of milled channels as shown in Figs. 8-2 and 8-17.
The cross section of each tube or cooling channel will be a minimum at the
throat region, gradually become larger, and be about two or more times as
large at the chamber and diverging nozzle regions. The wall thickness (on the
hot gas side) should be as small as possible to reduce the temperature drop
across the wall (which reduces the thermal stresses and allows a lower wall
temperature) and to minimize the yielding of the material that occurs due to
thermal deformation and pressure loads. Figure 8-12 shows this behavior, but
for a thick wall. Practical considerations such as manufacturability, the num
ber of test firings before flight, the deformation under pressure loads, the
temperature gradient and dimensional tolerances also enter into the selection
of the wall thickness. A thickness of 0.5 mm and a cooling velocity of 15 m/sec
have been selected for the throat region of the cooling jacket and cooling
velocities of 7 m/sec in the chamber and the cooled nozzle segment. Milled
slots (rather than tubes) have been selected for this thrust chamber.
The selection of the number of milled slots, their cross sections, and the wall
thickness is a function of the coolant mass flow, its pressure, wall stresses, wall
material, and the shape of the channel. Figure 8-24 and Table 8-6 describe the
channel width and height for different numbers of channels and different
locations. The fuel coolant flow is diminished by the gas generator fuel flow
(0.293 kg/sec) and is about 4.387 kg/sec. For this flow and a cooling velocity of
15 m/sec in the throat region the cumulative cross-sectional area of all the
channels is only about 3.62 cm2 • The cooling velocity is lower in the chamber
and nozzle regions and the cumulative channel flow area will be larger there.
The variables are the number of channels, the thickness of the hot wall, the rib
thickness between channels, the cooling velocity, the gas temperature, and the
Hot gas side
of inner wall thickness
FIGURE 8--24. Segment of cooling jacket with milled channels and an electroformed
outer wall.
8.6. SAMPLE THRUST CHAMBER DESIGN ANALYSIS 333
TABLE 8-6. Alternative Milled Channel Configurations for Fuel (cooling) Flow of
4.387 kg/sec
Throat Section Chamber Section
Wall thickness 0.05 cm Wall thickness 0.06 cm
Rib thickness 0.08 cm Rib thickness 0.08
Total flow area 3.653 cm2 Total flow area 7.827 cm2
Flow velocity 15 m/sec Flow velocity 7.0 m/sec
Number of Channel Channel Number of Channel Channel
Channels Width, cm Depth, cm Channels Width, cm Depth, cm
80 0.257 0.177
100 0.193 0.189 100 0.456 0.171
120 0.145 0.210 120 0.367 0.179
140 0.113 0.231 140 0.303 0.184
150 0.100 0.243 150 0.277 0.188
160 0.092 0.247 160 0.255 0.192
180 0.070 0.289 180 0.218 0.196
location along the thrust chamber profile. The number of channels or tubes will
determine the shape of the cross section, ranging from deep and thin to almost
square. The effect of varying the number of channels or channel dimensions
and shape is shown in Table 8-6. The minimum inert mass of the cooling jacket
and a low friction loss occur, when the shape (which varies axially throughout
the jacket) is on the average close to a square. On the basis of analyses, as
shown in the table, a 150-channel design has been selected for giving favorable
cross section, reasonable dimensions for ease of fabrication, good cooling and
often low thermal wall stresses.
Reinforcing bands have to be put on the outside of the tubes or channels to
hold the internal gas pressure during operation, to contain the coolant pres
sures, which cause heated walls wanting to become round, and any surge
pressures during the start transient or arising from water hammer in the
lines. We assume a surge pressure of 50% above chamber pressure and a
steel strength a of 120,000 psi. In the chamber the inside diameter is 16.7 cm
(6.57 in.), the walls and channels are 0.3 cm thick, and the pressure is 700 psia
or 4.826 MPa. If one band allows the reinforcing of a length of chamber of
3.0 in. the cross sectional area of that reinforcing band will be
A = pDL/(2a) = [700 x 1.5 x (6.57 + 0.3) x 3]/(2 x 120,000) = 0.0902 in. If
the band were 1.0 in. wide, its thickness would be 0.09 in. and if it were 3 in.
wide it would be 0.3 in. thick. Large nozzle exit sections have been observed to
experience flutter or cyclic deformation, and therefore some stiffening rings
may be needed near the exit.
The capacity of the fuel to absorb heat is approximately cpmff.. T = 0.5 x
4.81 x 200 = 278,000 J/sec. The maximum f..T is established by keeping the
334 THRUST CHAMBERS
fuel well below its chemical decomposition point. This calculated heat absorp
tion is less than the heat transfer from the hot gases. It is therefore necessary to
reduce the gas temperature near the chamber and nozzle walls or to increase
the heat absorption. This can be accomplished by (1) introducing film cooling
by injection into the chamber just ahead of the nozzle, by (2) modifying the
injection patterns, so that a cooler, fuel-rich thick internal boundary layer is
formed, or (3) by allowing some nucleate boiling in the throat region. The
analysis of these three methods is not given here. Item (2), supplementary
cooling, is selected because it is easy to design and build, and can be based
on extensive data of prior favorable experience. However it causes a small loss
of performance (up to about I% in specific impulse).
Injector Design. The injector pattern can be any one of the several types
shown in Figs. 8-3 and 8-4. For this propellant combination we have used
both doublets (like and unlike), and triplets in the USA, and the Russians
have used multiple hollow double posts with swirling or rotation of the flow
in the outer annulus. Based on good experience and demonstrated
combustion stability with similar designs, we select a doublet self impinging
type stream pattern and an injector design similar to Fig 8-4. The impinging
streams form fans of liquid propellant, which break up into droplets.
Oxidizer and fuel fans alternate radially. We could also use a platelet design,
like Fig. 8-5.
The pressure drop across the injector is usually set at values between 15 and
25% of the chamber pressure, in part to obtain high injection velocities, which
aid in atomization and droplet breakup. In turn this leads to more complete
combustion (and thus better performance) and to stable combustion. We will
use 20% or 140 psi or 0.965 MPa for the injector pressure drop. There is a
small pressure loss in the injector passages. The injection velocities are found
from Eqs. 8-1 and 8-5. The equation is solved for the area A, which is the
cumulative cross-section area of all the injection holes of one of the propellants
in the injector face.
With rounded and clean injection hole entrances the discharge coefficient
will be about 0.80 as shown in Table 8-2. Solving for the cumulative injection
hole area for the fuel and the oxidizer flow gives 1.98 cm2 for the fuel and 4.098
cm2 for the oxidizer. A typical hole diameter in this size of injector would be
about 0.5 to 2.5 mm. We will use a hole size of 1.5 mm for the fuel holes (with
90% of the fuel flow) and 2.00 mm for the oxidizer hole size, resulting in 65
doublets of oxidizer holes and 50 doublets of fuel. By using a slightly smaller
fuel injection hole diameter, we can match the number of 65 doublets as used
with the oxidizer holes. These injection doublets will be arranged on the injec
tor face in concentric patterns similar to Fig. 8-4. We may be able to obtain a
slightly higher performance by going to smaller hole sizes and a large number
of fuel and oxidizer holes. In addition there will be extra fuel holes on the
periphery of the injector face to help in providing the cooler boundary layer,
which is needed to reduce heat transfer. They will use 10% of the fuel flow and,
PROBLEMS 335
for a 0.5 mm hole diameter, the number of holes will be about 100. To make a
good set of liquid fans, equal inclination angles of about 25° are used with the
doublet impingements. See Fig. 8-7.
Ignition. A pyrotechnic (solid propellant) igniter will be used. It has to have
enough energy and run long enough to provide the pressure and temperature
in the thrust chamber for good ignition. Its diameter has to be small enough
to be inserted through the throat, namely 8.0 cm maximum diameter and I 0
to 15 cm long.
Layout Drawings, Masses, Flows, and Pressure Drops. We now have
enough of the key design parameters of the selected thrust chamber, so a
preliminary layout drawing can be made. Before this can be done well, we
will need some analysis or estimates on the manifolds for fuel and oxidizer,
valve mounting provisions and their locations, a nozzle closure during
storage, a thrust structure, and possibly an actuator and gimbal mount, if
gimballing is required by the mission. A detailed layout or CAD (Computer
Aided Design) image (not shown in this analysis) would allow a more
accurate picture and a good determination of the mass of the thrust
chamber and its center of gravity both with and without propellants.
Estimates of gas pressures, liquid pressures (or pressure drops) in the flow
passages, injector, cooling jacket, and the valves are needed for the stress ana
lysis, so that various wall thicknesses and component masses can be determined.
Material properties will need to be obtained from references or tests. A few of
these analyses and designs may actually change some of the data we selected or
estimated early in this sample analysis and some of the calculated parameters
may have to be re-analyzed and revised. Further changes in the thrust chamber
design may become evident in the design of the engine, the tanks, or the inter
face with the vehicle. The methods, processes and fixtures for manufacturing
and testing (and the number and types of tests) will have to be evaluated and the
number of thrust chambers to be built has to be decided, before we can arrive at
a reasonable manufacturing plan, a schedule and cost estimates.
PROBLEMS
1. How much total heat per second can be absorbed in a thrust chamber with an inside
wall surface area of 0.200 m2 if the coolant is liquid hydrogen and the coolant
temperature does not exceed 145 K in the jacket? Coolant flow is 2 kg/sec. What
is the average heat transfer rate per second per unit area? Use the data from Table
7-1 and the following:
Heat of vaporization near boiling point 446 kJ/kg
Thermal conductivity (gas at 21 K) 0.013 W/m-K
(gas at 194.75 K) 0.128 W/m-K
(gas at 273.15 K) 0.165 W/m-K
336 THRUST CHAMBERS
2. During a static test a certain steel thrust chamber is cooled by water. The following
data are given:
Average water temperature 100°P
Thermal conductivity of water 1.07 x I 0-4 Btu/sec-ft2 -0P /ft
Gas temperature 4500°P
Viscosity of water 2.5 x 10-5 lbf-sec/ft2
Specific heat of water 1.0 Btu/lb-0P
i !
Cooling passage dimensions x in.
Water flow through passage 0.585 lb/sec
Thickness of inner wall k in.
Heat absorbed 1.3 Btu/in.2-sec
Thermal conductivity of wall material 26 Btu/hr-ft2 -0P /ft
Determine (a) the film coefficient of the coolant; (b) the wall temperature on the
coolant side; (c) the wall temperature on the gas side.
3. In the example of Problem 2 determine the water flow required to decrease the wall
temperature on the gas side by I00°P. What is the percentage increase in coolant
velocity? Assume that the various properties of the water and the average water
temperature do not change.
4. Express the total temperature drop in Problem 2 in terms of the percentage tem
preature drops through the coolant film, the wall, and the gas film.
5. Determine the absolute and relative reduction in wall temperatures and heat trans
fer caused by applying insulation in a liquid-cooled rocket chamber with the follow
ing data:
Tube wall thickness 0.381 mm
Gas temperature 2760 K
Gas-side wall temperature 1260 K
Heat transfer rate 15 MW/m2
Liquid film coefficient 23 kW/m2-K
Wall material Stainless steel AISI type 302
A 0.2 mm thick layer of insulating paint is applied on the gas side; the paint consists
mostly of magnesia particles. The conductivity of this magnesia is 2.59 W /m2-K/m.
The stainless steel has an average thermal conductivity of 140 Btu/hr-ft2 -0P/in.
6. A small thruster has the following characteristics:
Propellants Nitrogen tetroxide and monomethyl hydrazine
Injection individual hole size Between 0.063 and 0.030 in.
Injection hole pattern Unlike impinging doublet
Thrust chamber type Ablative liner with a carbon-carbon nozzle
throat insert
Specific gravities: 1.446 for oxidizer and 0.876 for fuel
Impingement point 0.25 in. from injector face
Direction of jet momentum Parallel to chamber axis after impingement
r = 1.65 (fuel rich) Us)actual = 251 sec
F = 300 !bf tb = 25 sec
p 1 = 250 psi A1/A 1 = 3.0
(!'ip)inj = 50.0 psi (CJ)o = (Cd)J = 0.86
PROBLEMS 337
Determine the number of oxidizer and fuel holes and their angles. Make a sketch to
show the symmetric hole pattern and the feed passages in the injector. To protect
the wall, the outermost holes should all be fuel holes.
7. A large, uncooled, uninsulated, low carbon steel thrust chamber burned out in the
throat region during a test. The wall (0.375 in. thick) had melted and there were
several holes. The test engineer said that he estimated the heat transfer to have been
about 15 Btu/in.2 . The chamber was repaired and you are responsible for the next
test. Someone suggested that a series of water hoses be hooked up to spray plenty of
water on the outside of the nozzle wall at the throat region during the next test to
prolong the firing duration. The steel's melting point is estimated to be 2550°F.
Because of the likely local variation in mixture ratio and possibly imperfect impin
gement, you anticipate some local gas regions that are oxidizer rich and could start
the rapid oxidation of the steel. You therefore decide that 2250°F should be the
maximum allowable inner wall temperature. Besides knowing the steel weight den
sity (0.284 lbf/in.3 ), you have the following data for steel for the temperature range
from ambient to 2250°F: the specific heat is 0.143 Btu/lbm-°F and the thermal
conductivity is 260 Btu/hr-ft2-°F/in. Determine the approximate time for running
the next test (without burnout) both with and without the water sprays. Justify any
assumptions you make about the liquid film coefficient of the water flow. If the
water spray seems to be worth while (getting at least 10% more burning time),
make sketches with notes on how the mechanic should arrange for this water flow
so it will be most effective.
8. The following conditions are given for a double-walled cooling jacket of a rocket
thrust chamber assembly:
Rated chamber pressure 210 psi
Rated jacket pressure 290 psi
Chamber diameter 16.5 in.
Nozzle throat diameter 5.0 in.
Nozzle throat gas pressure 112 psi
Average inner wall temperature at throat region 110°F
Average inner wall temperature at chamber region 800°F
Cooling passage height at chamber and nozzle exit 0.375 in.
Cooling passage height at nozzle throat 0.250 in.
Nozzle exit gas pressure 14.7 psi.
Nozzle exit diameter 10 in.
Wall material I 020 carbon steel
Safety factor on yield strength 2.5
Cooling fluid RP-I
Average thermal conductivity of steel 250 Btu/hr-ft2-F/in.
Assume other parameters, if needed. Compute the outside diameters and the thick
ness of the inner and outer walls at the chamber, at the throat, and at the nozzle
exit.
9. Determine the hole sizes and the angle setting for a multiple-hole, doublet imping
ing stream injector that uses alcohol and liquid oxygen as propellants. The resultant
momentum should be axial, and the angle between the oxygen and fuel jets (y + YJ)
0
should be 60°. Assume the following:
( Cd ) 0.87 Chamber pressure 300 psi
0
(Cd)f 0.91 Fuel pressure 400 psi
338 THRUST CHAMBERS
Po 71 lb/ft3 Oxygen pressure 380 psi
Pr 51 lb/ft3 Number of jet pairs 4
r 1.20 Thrust 250 !bf
Actual specific impulse 218 sec
Answers: 0.0197 in.; 0.0214 in.; 32.3°; 27.7°.
10. Explain in a rational manner why Fig. 8-10 has a maximum and how this maximum
would be affected by the duty cycle, ablative material, heat loss from the thrust
chamber, effect of altitude, and so on. Why does this maximum not occur at 90%
burn time?
11. Table 10---5 shows that the RD 120 rocket engine can operate down to 85% of full
thrust and at a mixture ratio variation of ±10.0%. In a particular static test the
average thrust was held at 96% of nominal and the average mixture ratio was 2.0%
fuel rich. Assume a 1.0% residual propellant, but neglect other propellant budget
allowances. What percentage of the fuel and oxidizer that have been loaded will
remain unused at thrust termination? If we want to correct the mixture ratio in the
last 20.0% of the test duration and use up all the available propellant, what would
be the mixture ratio and propellant flows for this last period?
12. Make a simple sketch to scale of the thrust chamber that was analyzed in Section
8.6. The various dimensions should be close, but need not be accurate. Include or
make separate sketches of the cooling jacket and the injector. Also compile a table
of all the key characteristics, similar to Table 8-1, but include gas generator flows,
and key materials. Make estimates or assumptions for any key data that is not
mentioned in Section 8.6
SYMBOLS
A area, m2 (ft2 )
Aa Projected area of linear aerospike ramp, m2 (ft2 )
cP specific heat at constant pressure, J/kg-K (Btu/lbm R)
c average liquid specific heat, J/kg-K (Btu/lbm R)
Cd discharge coefficient
CF thrust coefficient ( see Eq. 3-31)
D diameter, m (ft)
E modulus of elasticity, N/m2 (!bf/in. 2), or radiation energy, kg-m2 /sec2
f friction loss coefficient, or geometric factor in radiation
g 0 sea level acceleration of gravity, 9.806 m/sec2 (32.17 ft/sec2 )
h film coefficient, W/(m2-K)
t,,h enthalpy change, J /kg (Btu/lb)
I, specific impulse, sec
k specific heat ratio
L length, m (ft)
L* characteristic chamber length, m (ft)
m mass, kg
SYMBOLS 339
m
mass flow rate, kg/sec (lb/sec)
p pressure, N/m2 or Pa (lbf/in.2 )
Pr Prandtl number (cpµ/K)
q heat-transfer rate or heat flow per unit area, J/m2-sec (Btu/ft2-sec)
Q volume flow rate, m3/ sec (ft3/ sec), or heat flow rate, J /sec
r flow mixture ratio (oxidizer to fuel)
s stress N/m2 (lbf/in.2)
time, sec
ls stay time, sec
lw wall thickness, m (in.)
T absolute temperature, K (R)
v velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
V specific volume, m3 /kg(ft3/ lb)
Ve combustion chamber volume (volume up to throat), m3 (ft3 )
Greek Letters
y angle between chamber axis and oxidizer stream
0
YJ angle between chamber axis and fuel stream
~ finite differential
8 angle between chamber axis and the resultant stream
E nozzle area ratio (E = A 2/A,), or emissivity of radiating body
e
angle
K thermal conductivity, J/(m2-sec-K)/m (Btu/in.2-sec2 - R/in.)
).. coefficient of thermal expansion, m/m-K (in./in.-R)
µ viscosity, m2 /sec
v Poisson ratio
p density, kg/m3 (lbf/ft3 )
CJ Stefan-Boltzmann constant (5.67 x 10-8 W/m2-K4 )
Subscripts
am arithmetic mean
C chamber
f fuel or final condition
g gas
l liquid
0 oxidizer
throat
w wall
wg wall on side of gas
wl wall on side of liquid
0 initial condition
340 THRUST CHAMBERS
1 inlet or chamber condition
2 nozzle exit condition
3 atmosphere or ambient condition
REFERENCES
8-1. R. Sackheim, D. F. Fritz, and H. Maklis, "The Next Generation of Spacecraft
Propulsion Systems," A/AA Paper 79-1301, 1979.
8-2. S. Peery and A. Minnick, "Design and Development of an Advanced Expander
Combustor," A/AA Paper 98-3675, July 1998.
8-3. R. D. McKown, "Brazing the SSME," Threshold, an Engineering Journal of
Power Technology, No. I, Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International
(now The Boeing Co.), Canoga Park, CA, March 1987, pp. 8-13.
8-4. R. A. Ellis, J. C. Lee, F. M. Payne, M. Lacoste, A. Lacombe, and P. Joyes,
"Testing of the RLIOB-2 Carbon-Carbon Nozzle Extension," A/AA
Conference Paper 98-3363, July 1998.
8-5. M. Niino, A. Kumakawa, T. Hirano, K. Sumiyashi, and R. Watanabe, "Life
Prediction of CIP Formed Thrust Chambers," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 13, Nos.
6--7, 1986, pp. 363-369 (fatigue life prediction).
8-6. J. S. Porowski, W. J. O'Donnell, M. L. Badlani, B. Kasraie, and H. J. Kasper,
"Simplified Design and Life Predictions of Rocket Thrustchambers," Journal of
Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 22, No. 2, March-April 1985, pp. 181-187.
8-7. J. S. Kinkaid, "Aerospike Evolution," Threshold, The Boeing Co., Rocketdyne
Propulsion and Power, No. 18, Spring 2000, pp. 4-13.
8-8. T. Harmon, "X-33 Linear Aerospike on the Fast Track in System Engineering,"
A/AA Paper 99-2181, Joint Propulsion Conference, June 1999.
8-9. A. J. Fortini and R. H. Tuffias, "Advanced Materials for Chemical Propulsion:
Oxide-Iridium/Rhenium Combustion Chambers," A/AA Paper 99-2894, June
1999.
8-10. F. P. Incropera and D. P. DeWitt, Introduction to Heat Transfer, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1996.
8-11. A. A. Samarskii and P. N. Vabishchevich, Computational Heat Transfer, Vol. 1.
Mathematical Modeling and Vol. 2. The Finite Difference Methodology, John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.
8-12. D. R. Bartz, "Survey of Relationships between Theory and Experiment for
Convective Heat Transfer in Rocket Combustion Gases," in Advances in
Rocket Propulsion, S. S. Penner (Ed.), AGARD, Technivision Services,
Manchester, UK, 1968.
8-13. N. Sugathan, K. Srinivathan, and S. Srinivasa Murthy, "Experiments on Heat
Transfer in a Cryogenic Engine Thrust Chamber," Journal of Propulsion and
Power, Vol. 9, No. 2, March-April 1993.
8-14. E. Mayer, "Analysis of Pressure Feasibility Limits in Regenerative Cooling of
Combustion Chambers for Large Thrust Rockets," in Liquid Rockets and
REFERENCES 341
Propellants, L. E. Bollinger, M. Goldsmith, and A. W. Lemmon, Jr (Eds.),
Academic Press, New York, 1969, pp. 543-561.
8-15. J. M. Fowler and C. F. Warner, "Measurements of the Heat-Transfer
Coefficients for Hydrogen Flowing in a Heated Tube," American Rocket
Society Journal, Vol. 30, No. 3, March 1960, pp. 266-267.
8-16. P.-A. Baudart, V. Duthoit, T. Delaporte, and E. Znaty, "Numerical Modeling of
the HM 7 B Main Chamber Ignition," A/AA Paper 89-2397, 1989.
8-17. A. R. Casillas, J. Eninger, G. Josephs, J. Kenney, and M. Trinidad, "Control of
Propellant Lead/Lag to the LEA in the AXAF Propulsion System," A/AA Paper
98-3204, July 1998.
CHAPTER 9
COMBUSTION OF LIQUID
PROPELLANTS
The design, development, and operation of liquid rocket engines requires
efficient stable burning of the propellants and the generation of a high
temperature, uniform gas that is the rocket's working fluid. In this chapter
we treat the complex phenomena of the combustion processes in the com
bustion chamber of a liquid bipropellant thrust chamber. We describe in
general terms the combustion behavior, the progress in analysis of combus
tion, the several types of combustion instability with its undesirable effects,
and semiempirical remedies. The objective is to operate at very high com
bustion efficiencies and to prevent the occurrence of combustion instability.
Thrust chambers should operate with stable combustion over a wide range
of operating conditions. For a treatment of these subjects see Refs. 9-1 to
9-3.
The combustion of liquid propellants is very efficient in well-designed
thrust chambers, precombustion chambers, or gas generators. Efficiencies
of 95 to 99.5% are typical compared to turbojets or furnaces, which can
range from 50 to 97%. This is due to the very high reaction rates at the
high combustion temperatures and the thorough mixing of fuel and oxidizer
reaction species by means of good injection distribution and gas turbulence.
The losses are due to incomplete burning or inadequate mixing (nonuniform
mixing ratio). For very small bipropellant thrust chambers, where the injector
has very few injection orifices or elements, the combustion efficiency can be
well below 95%.
342
9.1. COMBUSTION PROCESS 343
9.1. COMBUSTION PROCESS
In describing the combustion processes, 1t 1s convenient and helpful to the
understanding to divide the combustion chamber into a series of discrete
zones, as shown in Fig. 9-1 for a typical configuration. It has a flat injector
face with many small injection orifices for introducing both fuel and oxidi
zer liquids as many discrete individual streams, jets, or thin sprays or sheets.
The relative thicknesses of these zones, their behavior, and their transitions
are influenced by the specific propellant combination, the operating condi
tions (pressure, mixture ratio, etc.), the design of the injector, and chamber
geometry. The boundaries between the zones shown in Fig. 9-1 are really
not flat surfaces and do not display steady flow. They are undulating,
dynamically movable, irregular boundaries with localized changes in velo
city, temporary bulges, locally intense radiation emissions, or variable tem
perature. Table 9-1 shows the major interacting physical and chemical
processes that occur in the chamber. This table is a modification of tables
and data in Refs. 9-2 and 9-3.
The combustion behavior is propellant dependent. If the fuel were hydrogen
that has been used to cool the thrust chamber, the hydrogen would be gaseous
and fairly warm (60 to 500 K); there would be no liquid hydrogen droplets and
no evaporation. With hypergolic propellants there is an initial chemical reac
tion in the liquid phase when a droplet of fuel impinges on a droplet of oxidi
zer. Experiments show that the contact can create local explosions and enough
energy release to suddenly vaporize a thin layer of the fuel and the oxidizer
locally at the droplet's contact face; there immediately follows a vapor chemi
cal reaction and a blow-apart and breakup of the droplets, due to the explosion
shock wave pressure (Refs. 9-4 and 9-5).
Injection/ Rapid Streamtube
atomization combustion combustion Transonic-flow zone
zone zone
Supersonic
expansion
zone
1---
I Chamber-combustion region_
with subsonic flow
Two-dimensional
sonic-flo.v line
FIGURE 9-1. Division of combustion chamber into zones for analysis. (Reprinted with
permission from Ref. 8-1, copyright by AIAA.)
344 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
TABLE 9-1. Physical and Chemical Processes in the Combustion of Liquid
Propellants
Injection Atomization Vaporization
Liquid jets enter chamber at Impingement of jets or sheets Droplet gasification and
relatively low velocities Formation of liquid fans diffusion
Sometimes gas propellant is Formation of droplets Further heat release from
injected Secondary breakup of drops local chemical reactions
Partial evaporation of liquids Liquid mixing and some Low gas velocities and some
Interaction of jets and high liquid-liquid chemical cross flow
pressure gas reaction Heat absorbed by radiation
Oscillations of jets or fans and conduction from
as they become unstable blowback of turbulent gases
during breakup from the hot reaction zone
Vaporization begins and Acceleration to higher
some vapor reactions occur velocities
Vaporization rate influenced by
pressure or temperature
oscillations and acoustic
waves
Mixing and Reaction Expansion in Chamber
Turbulent mixing (three-dimensional) Chemical kinetics causes attainment of
Multiple chemical reactions and major heat final combustion temperature and final
releases equilibrium reaction gas composition
Interactions of turbulence with droplets Gas dynamics displays turbulence and
and chemical reactions increasing axial gas velocities
Temperature rise reduces densities Formation of a boundary layer
Local mixture ratios, reaction rates, or Acceleration to high chamber velocities
velocities are not uniform across chamber Streamlined high-velocity axial flow with
and vary rapidly with time very little cross flow
Some tangential and radial flows
Rapid Combustion Zone
In this zone intensive and rapid chemical reactions occur at increasingly higher
temperature; any remaining liquid droplets are vaporized by convective heating
and gas pockets of fuel-rich and fuel-lean gases are mixed. The mixing is aided
by local turbulence and diffusion of the gas species.
The further breakdown of the propellant chemicals into intermediate frac
tions and smaller, simpler chemicals and the oxidation of fuel fractions occur
rapidly in this zone. The rate of heat release increases greatly and this causes
the specific volume of the gas mixture to increase and the local axial velocity to
increase by a factor of 100 or more. The rapid expansion of the heated gases
also forces a series of local transverse gas flows from hot high-burning-rate
sites to colder low-burning-rate sites. The liquid droplets that may still persist
in the upstream portion of this zone do not follow the gas flow quickly and are
9.1. COMBUSTION PROCESS 345
difficult to move in a transverse direction. Therefore, zones of fuel-rich or
oxidizer-rich gases will persist according to the orifice spray pattern in the
upstream injection zone. The gas composition and mixture ratio across the
chamber section become more uniform as the gases move through this zone,
but the mixture never becomes truly uniform. As the reaction product gases are
accelerated, they become hotter (due to further heat releases) and the lateral
velocities become relatively small compared to the increasing axial velocities.
The combustion process is not a steady flow process. Some people believe
that the combustion is locally so intense that it approches localized explosions
that create a series of shock waves. When observing any one specific location in
the chamber, one finds that there are rapid fluctuations in pressure, tempera
ture, density, mixture ratio, and radiation emissions with time.
Injection/Atomization Zone
Two different liquids are injected with storable propellants and with liquid
oxygen/hydrocarbon combinations. They are injected through orifices at velo
cities typically between 7 and 60 m/sec or about 20 to 200 ft/sec. The injector
design has a profound influence on the combustion behavior and some see
mingly minor design changes can have a major effect on instability. The pat
tern, sizes, number, distribution, and types of orifices influence the combustion
behavior, as do the pressure drop, manifold geometry, or surface roughness in
the injection orifice walls. The individual jets, streams, or sheets break up into
droplets by impingement of one jet with another (or with a surface), by the
inherent instabilities of liquid sprays, or by the interaction with gases at a
different velocity and temperature. In this first zone the liquids are atomized
into a large number of small droplets (see Refs. 9-3 and 9-6). Heat is trans
ferred to the droplets by radiation from the very hot rapid combustion zone
and by convection from moderately hot gases in the first zone. The droplets
evaporate and create local regions rich either in fuel vapor or oxidizer vapor.
This first zone is heterogeneous; it contains liquids and vaporized propellant
as well as some burning hot gases. With the liquid being located at discrete
sites, there are large gradients in all directions with respect to fuel and oxidizer
mass fluxes, mixture ratio, size and dispersion of droplets, or properties of the
gaseous medium. Chemical reactions occur in this zone, but the rate of heat
generation is relatively low, in part because the liquids and the gases are still
relatively cold and in part because vaporization near the droplets causes fuel
rich and fuel-lean regions which do not burn as quickly. Some hot gases from
the combustion zone are recirculated back from the rapid combustion zone,
and they can create local gas velocities that flow across the injector face. The
hot gases, which can flow in unsteady vortexes or turbulence patterns, are
essential to the initial evaporation of the liquids.
The injection, atomization and vaporization processes are different if one of
the propellants is a gas. For example, this occurs in liquid oxygen with gaseous
hydrogen propellant in thrust chambers or precombustion chambers, where
346 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
liquid hydrogen has absorbed heat from cooling jackets and has been gasified.
Hydrogen gas has no droplets and does not evaporate. The gas usually has a
much higher injection velocity (above 120 m/sec) than the liquid propellant.
This causes shear forces to be imposed on the liquid jets, with more rapid
droplet formation and gasification. The preferred injector design for gaseous
hydrogen and liquid oxygen is different from the individual jet streams used
with storable propellants, as shown in Chapter 8.
Stream Tube Combustion Zone
In this zone oxidation reactions continue, but at a lower rate, and some addi
tional heat is released. However, chemical reactions continue because the mix
ture tends to be driven toward an equilibrium composition. Since axial
velocities are high (200 to 600 m/sec) the transverse convective flow velocities
become relatively small. Streamlines are formed and there is relatively little
turbulent mixing across streamline boundaries. Locally the flow velocity and
the pressure fluctuate somewhat. The residence time in this zone is very short
compared to the residence time in the other two zones. The streamline type,
inviscid flow, and the chemical reactions toward achieving chemical equili
brium presist not only throughout the remainder of the combustion chamber,
but are also extended into the nozzle.
Actually, the major processes do not take place strictly sequentially, but
several seem to occur simultaneously in several parts of the chamber. The
flame front is not a simple plane surface across the combustion chamber.
There is turbulence in the gas flow in all parts of the combustion chamber.
The residence time of the propellant material in the combustion chamber
is very short, usually less than 1O milliseconds. Combustion in a liquid
rocket engine is very dynamic, with the volumetric heat release being
approximately 370 MJ /m3-sec, which is much higher than in turbojets.
Further, the higher temperature in a rocket causes chemical reaction rates
to be several times faster (increasing exponentially with temperature) than in
turbojet.
9.2. ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION
For the purpose of analysing the combustion process and its instabilities, it has
been convenient to divide the acoustical characteristics into linear and non
linear behavior. A number of computer simulations with linear analyses have
been developed over the last 45 years and have been used to understand the
combustion process with liquid propellant combustion devices and to predict
combustion oscillation frequencies. The nonlinear behavior (for example, why
does a disturbance cause an apparently stable combustion to suddenly become
unstable?) is not well understood and not properly simulated. Mathematical
simulations require a number of assumptions and simplifications to permit
9.2. ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION 347
feasible solutions (see Refs. 9-1, 9-3, 9-6, and 9-7). Good models exist for
relatively simple phenomena such as droplets of a propellant vaporizing and
burning in a gaseous atmosphere or the steady-state flow of gases with heat
release from chemical reactions. The thermochemical equilibrium principles
mentioned in Chapter 5 also apply here. Some programs who consider some
turbulence and film cooling effects.
The following phenomena are usually ignored or greatly simplified: cross
flows; nonsymmetrical gradients; unsteadiness of the flow; time variations in
the local temperature, local velocity, or local gas composition; thermochemical
reactions at local off-design mixture ratios and at different kinetic rates;
enhancement of vaporization by acoustic fields (see Ref. 9-8); uncertainties
in the spatial as well as the size distribution of droplets from sprays; or drag
forces on droplets. It requires skilled, experienced personnel to use, interpret,
and modify the more complex programs so that meaningful results and con
clusions can be obtained. The outputs of these computer programs can give
valuable help and confirmation about the particular design and are useful
guides in interpreting actual test results, but by themselves they are not suffi
cient to determine the designs, select specific injector patterns, or predict the
ocurrence of combustion instabilities.
All the existing computer programs known to the authors are suitable for
steady-state flow conditions, usually at a predetermined average mixture ratio
and chamber pressure. However, during the starting, thrust change, and stop
ping transients, the mixture ratio and the pressure change drastically. The
analysis of these transient conditions is more difficult.
The combustion is strongly influenced by the injector design. The following
are some of the injection parameters which influence combustion behavior:
injector spray or jet pattern; their impingement; hole sizes or hole distribution;
droplet evaporation; injection pressure drop; mixture ratio; pressure or tem
perature gradients near the injector; chamber/injector geometry; initial propel
lant temperature, and liquid injection pressure drop. Attempts to analyze these
effects have met with only partial success.
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is a relatively new analytical tool that
can provide a comprehensive description of complex fluid dynamic and ther
modynamic behavior. It allows for a time history of all parameters and can
even include some nonlinear effects. Numerical approaches are used to eval
uate sets of equations and models that represent the behavior of the fluid.
For complex geometries the information has been tracked with up to 250,000
discrete locations and can include changes in gas composition, thermody
namic conditions, equilibrium reactions, phase changes, viscous or nonvis
cous flow, one-, two-, or three-dimensional flow, and steady-state or transient
conditions. It has been applied to resonance cavities in injectors or chambers
and to the flow of burning gases through turbines. A comprehensive rocket
combustion model using CFD is not yet available, but could become useful
in the future.
348 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
9.3. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY
If the process of rocket combustion is not controlled (by proper design), then
combustion instabilities can occur which can very quickly cause excessive
pressure vibration forces (which may break engine parts) or excessive heat
transfer (which may melt thrust chamber parts). The aim is to prevent occur
rence of this instability and to maintain reliable operation (see Ref. 9-8).
Although much progress has been made in understanding and avoiding com
bustion instability, new rocket engines can still be plagued by it.
Table 9-2 lists the principal types of combustion vibrations encountered in
liquid rocket thrust chambers (see Refs. 9-3 and 9-9). Admittedly, combus
tion in a liquid rocket is never perfectly smooth; some fluctuations of pres
sure, temperature, and velocity are always present. When these fluctuations
interact with the natural frequencies of the propellant feed system (with and
without vehicle structure) or the chamber acoustics, periodic superimposed
oscillations, recognized as instability, occur. In normal rocket practice smooth
combustion occurs when pressure fluctuations during steady operation do not
exceed about ±5% of the mean chamber pressure. Combustion that gives
greater pressure fluctuations at a chamber wall location which occur at com
pletely random intervals is called rough combustion. Unstable combustion, or
combustion instability, displays organized oscillations occurring at well
defined intervals with a pressure peak that may be maintained, may increase,
or may die out. These periodic peaks, representing fairly large concentrations
TABLE 9-2. Principal Types of Combustion Instability
Frequency
Range
Type and Word Description (Hz) Cause Relationship
Low frequency, called chugging or 10-400 Linked with pressure interactions
feed system instability between propellant feed system,
if not the entire vehicle, and
combustion chamber
Intermediate frequency, called 400---lOOO Linked with mechanical
acoustic," buzzing, or vibrations of propulsion
entropy waves structure, injector manifold, flow
eddies, fuel/oxidizer ratio
fluctuations, and propellant
feed system resonances
High frequency, called screaming, Above Linked with combustion
screeching, or squealing lOOO process forces (pressure waves)
and chamber acoustical
resonance properties
"Use of the word acoustical stems from the fact the frequency of the oscillations is related to
combustion chamber dimensions and velocity of sound in the combustion gas.
9.3. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 349
of vibratory energy, can be easily recognized against the random-noise back
ground (see Fig. 9-2).
Chugging, the first type of combustion instability listed in Table 9-2, stems
mostly from the elastic nature of the feed systems and structures of vehicles or
the imposition of propulsion forces upon the vehicle. Chugging of an engine or
thrust chamber assembly can occur in a test facility, especially with low cham
ber pressure engines (100 to 500 psia), because of propellant pump cavitation,
gas entrapment in propellant flow, tank pressurization control fluctuations,
and vibration of engine supports and propellant lines. It can be caused by
resonances in the engine feed system (such as an oscillating bellows inducing
a periodic flow fluctuation) or a coupling of structural and feed system fre
quencies.
Smooth combustion
Time
Rough combustion
Time
Stability rating test
Time
FIGURE 9-2. Typical oscillogrpah traces of chamber pressure p with time for different
1
combustion events.
350 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
When both the vehicle structure and the propellant liquid in the feed system
have about the same natural frequency, then force coupling can occur, not only
to maintain, but also to strongly amplify oscillations. Propellant flow rate
disturbances, usually at 10 to 50 Hz, give rise to low-frequency longitudinal
combustion instability, producing a longitudinal motion of vibration in the
vehicle. This vehicle flight instability phenomenon has been called pogo
instability since it is similar to pogo jumping stick motion. Pogo instabilities
can occur in the propellant feed lines of large vehcles such as space launch
vehicles or ballistic missiles.
Avoiding objectionable engine-vehicle coupled oscillation is best accom
plished at the time of initial design of the vehicle, as contrasted to applying
"fixes" later as has been the case with rocket engines for the Thor, Atlas, and
Titan vehicles. Analytical methods exist for understanding the vibration modes
and damping tendencies of major vehicle components, including the propellant
tanks, tank pressurization systems, propellant flow lines, engines, and basic
vehicle structure. Figure 9-3, a simplified spring-mass model of a typical
two-stage vehicle, indicates the complexity of the analytical problem.
Fortunately, the vibrational characteristics of the assembly can be affected
substantially by designing damping into the major components or subassem
blies. Techniques for damping pogo instability include the use of energy
absorption devices in fluid flow lines, perforated tank liners, special tank sup
ports, and properly designed engine, interstage, and payload support structures
(see Refs. 9-10 and 9-11).
A partially gas-filled pogo accumulator has been an effective damping
device; it is attached to the main propellant feed line. Such an accumulator
is used in the oxidizer feed line of the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME)
betwen the two oxidizer turbopumps; it can be seen in Figs. 6-1 and 6-12.
The SSME fuel line does not need such a damping device, because the fuel has
a relatively very low density and a lower mass flow.
The dynamic characteristics of a propellant pump can also have an influence
on the pogo-type vibrations, as examined in Ref. 9-12. The pogo frequency will
change as propellant is consumed and the remaining mass of propellant in the
vehicle changes. The bending or flexing of pipes, joints or bellows, or long
tanks also has an influence.
Buzzing, the intermediate type of instability, seldom represents pressure
perturbations greater than 5% of the mean in the combustion chamber and
usually is not accompanied by large vibratory energy. It often is more noisy
and annoying than damaging, although the occurrence of buzzing may initiate
high-frequency instability. Often it is characteristic of coupling between the
combustion process and flow in a portion of the propellant feed system.
Initiation is thought to be from the combustion process. Acoustic resonance
of the combustion chamber with a critical portion of the propellant flow sys
tem, sometimes originating in a pump, promotes continuation of the phenom
enon. This type of instability is more prevalent in medium-size engines (2000 to
250,000 N thrust or about 500 to 60,000 !bf) than in large engines.
9.3. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 351
m1-Payload
mrSpacer, dome,
~ barrel
m4-Dome, ~ barrel
m5-Between tanks
m6-Dome, ~ barrel
m7-Fuel
m8-Dome, ~ barrel
m9-Tail skirt
m -Engine
10
mu -Forward skirt
m12 -Dome,~ barrel
m14 -Dome,~ barrel
Y, between tanks
m15 -Dome,~ barrel
~ between tanks
m17-Fuel cone,
~ barrel
m1a-Pumps
m19-Tail skirt
A
/ \ m20-Engines
L_..::,
FIGURE 9-3. Typical two-stage vehicle spring-mass model used in analysis of pogo
vibration in the veritcal direction.
352 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
The third type, screeching or screaming, has high frequency and is most
perplexing and most common in the development of new engines. Both liquid
and solid propellant rockets commonly experience high-frequency instablity
during their development phase. Since energy content increases with frequency,
this type is the most destructive, capable of destroying an engine in much less
than I sec. Once encountered, it is the type for which it is most difficult to
prove that the incorporated "fixes" or improvements render the engine
"stable" under all launch and flight conditions. It can be treated as a phenom
enon isolated to the combustion chamber and not generally influenced by feed
system or structure.
High-frequency instability occurs in at least two modes, longitudinal and
transverse. The longitudinal mode (sometimes called organ pipe mode propa
gates along axial planes of the combustion chamber and the pressure waves are
reflected at the injector face and the converging nozzle cone. The transverse
modes propagate along planes perpendicular to the chamber axis and can be
broken down into tangential and radial modes. Transverse mode instability
predominates in large liquid rockets, particularly in the vicinity of the injector.
Figure 9--4 shows the distribution of pressure at various time intervals in a
cylindrical combustion chamber (cross section) encountering transverse mode
instability. Two kinds of wave form have been observed for tangential vibra
tions. One can be considered a standing wave that remains fixed in position
while its pressure amplitude fluctuates. The second is a spinning or traveling
tangential wave which has associated with it a rotation of the whole vibratory
system. This waveform can be visualized as one in which the amplitude remains
constant while the wave rotates. Combinations of transverse and longitudinal
modes can also occur and their frequency can also be estimated.
Energy that drives screeching is believed to be predominantly from acous
tically stimulated variations in droplet vaporization and/or mixing, local deto
nations, and acoustic changes in combustion rates. Thus, with favorable
acoustic properties, high-frequency combustion instability, once triggered,
can rapidly drive itself into a destructive mode. Invariable, a distinct boundary
layer seems to disappear and heat transfer rates increase by an order of mag
nitude, much as with detonation, causing metal melting and wall burn
throughs, sometimes within less than I sec. The tangential modes appear to
be the most damaging, heat transfer rates during instability often increasing 4
to 10 times. Often the instantaneous pressure peaks are about twice as high as
with stable operation.
One possible source of triggering high-frequency instability is a rocket com
bustion phenomenon called popping. Popping is an undesirable random high
amplitude pressure disturbance that occurs during steady-state operation of a
rocket engine with hypergolic propellants. It is a possible source for initiation
of high-frequency instability. "Pops" exhibit some of the characteristics of a
detonation wave. The rise time of the pressure is a few microseconds and the
pressure ratio across the wave can be as high as 7: I. The elimination of popping
9.3. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 353
N
l!!!fJ
+~
~
+
(Initial condition) (Half cycle later) (Initial condition) (Half cycle later)
0 0
I
STANDING 1ST TANGENTIAL SPINNING 1ST TANGENTIAL
N N
+
(Initial condition) (Half cycle later) N N
(Initial condition) (Half cycle later)
STANDING 2ND TANGENTIAL
1ST RADIAL
FIGURE 9---4. Simplified representation of transverse pressure oscillation modes at two
time intervals in a cylindrical combustion chamber. The solid line curves indicate pres
sures greater than the normal or mean operating pressure and the dashed lines indicate
lower pressures. The N-N lines show the node locations for these wave modes.
is usually achieved by redesign of the injector rather than by the application of
baffles or absorbers.
Some combustion instabilities can be induced by pulsations in the liquid flow
originating in turbopumps. Unsteady liquid flow can be caused by irregular
cavitation at the leading edge of the inducer impellers or the main pump
354 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
impellers. Also, when an impeller's trailing edge passes a rib or stationary vane
of the volute, a small pressure perturbation always occurs in the liquid flow
that travels downstream to the injector. These two types of pressure fluctuation
can be greatly amplified if they coincide with the natural frequency of combus
tion vibrations in the chamber.
The estimated natural frequencies can be determined from the wavelength!,
or the distance traveled per cycle, and the acoustic velocity a (see Eq. 3-10).
The frequency, or number of cycles per second, is
frequency= a/!= (1/!)JkTR'/'iJR (9-1)
where k is the specific heat ratio, R' the universal gas constant, 'iJR the estimated
molecular weight of the hot chamber gases, and T the local average absolute
temperature. The length of wave travel depends on the vibrational mode, as
shown in Fig. 9-4. Smaller chambers give higher frequencies.
Table 9-3 shows a list of estimated vibration frequencies for the Vulcain
HM 60 rocket thrust chamber; it operates with liquid hydrogen and liquid
oxygen propellants at a vacuum thrust of 1008 kN, a nominal chamber pres
sure of 10 MPa, and a nominal mixture ratio of 5.6 (see Ref. 9-13). The data in
the table are based on acoustic measurements at ambient conditions with
corrections for an appropriate sonic velocity correlation; since the chamber
has a shallow conical shape and no discrete converging nozzle section, the
purely longitudinal vibration modes would be weak; in fact, no pure long
itudinal modes were detected.
Figure 9-5 shows a series of time-sequenced diagrams of frequency-pres
sure-amplitude measurements taken in the oxygen injector manifold of the
Vulcain HM 60 engine during the first 8 sec of a static thrust chamber test
while operating at off-nominal design conditions. Chugging can be seen at low
TABLE 9-3. Estimated Acoustic Hot Gas Frequencies for Nominal Chamber
Operating Conditions for the Vulcain HM-60 Thrust Chamber
Frequency Frequency
Modea (L, T, R) (Hz) Modea (L, T, R) (Hz)
Tl (0, 1, 0) 2424 LlT3 (1, 3, 0) 6303
LlTl (1, 1, 0) 3579 T4 (0, 4, 0) 6719
T2 (0, 2, 0) 3856 L2Rl (2, 0, 1) 7088
Rl (0, 0, 1) 4849 TS (0, 5, 0) 8035
LlT2 (1, 2, 0) 4987 TR21 (0, 2, 1) 8335
T3 (0, 3, 0) 5264 R2 (0, 0, 2) 8774
LlRl (1, 0, 1) 5934
Reprinted with AIAA permission from Ref. 9-13.
"Modes are classified as L (longitudinal), T (tangential), or R (radial) and the number refers to the
first, second, or third natural frequency.
9.3. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 355
Record
Number
(Time)
Pressure 2
500 1000 1500
Frequency (Hz)
FIGURE 9-5. Graphical representation of a series of 40 superimposed frequency
amplitude diagrams taken 0.200 sec apart during the start phase (for the first 8 sec)
of the Vulcain HM 60 thrust chamber. In this static hot-firing test the thrust chamber
was operating at 109 bar chamber pressure and an oxidizer-to-fuel mass flow mixture
ratio of 6.6. (Copied with permission from Ref. 9-13).
frequency (up to 500 Hz) during the first few seconds and a natural frequency
around 1500 Hz is attributed to the natural resonance frequency of the oxygen
injector dome structure where the high-frequency pressure transducer was
mounted. The continued oscillations observed at about 500 and 600 Hz are
probably resonances associated with the feed system.
Rating Techniques
Semi-empirical techniques exist for artificially disturbing combustion in a
rocket thrust chamber during test operation and evaluating its resistance to
instability (see Ref. 9-14). These include: (I) nondirectional "bombs" placed
within the combustion chamber; (2) oriented explosive pulses from a "pulse
gun" directed through the chamber sidewall; and (3) directed flows of inert gas
through the sidewall into the chamber. Often heavy prototype thrust chambers
are used because they are less expensive and more resistant to damage than
flight-weight engines. Other techniques used less widely but which are impor
tant, especially for small engines, include: (1) momentary operation at "off
mixture ratio;" (2) introduction of "slugs" of inert gas into a propellant line;
and (3) a purposeful "hard start" achieved by introducing a quantity of
unreacted propellant at the beginning of the operation.
The objective of these rating techniques is to measure and demonstrate the
ability of an engine system to return quickly to normal operation and stable
combustion after the combustion process has intentionally been disturbed or
perturbed.
All techniques are intended to introduce shock waves into the combustion
chamber or to otherwise perturb the combustion process, affording opportu
nity for measuring recovery time for a predetermined overpressure disturbance,
356 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
assuming stable combustion resumes. Important to the magnitude and mode of
the instability are the type of explosive charge selected, the size of the charge,
the location and direction of the charge, and the duration of the exciting pulse.
The bottom curve in Fig. 9-2 characterizes the recover of stable operation after
a combustion chamber was "bombed." The time interval to recover and the
magnitude of explosive or perturbation pressure are then used to rate the
resistance of the engine to instability.
The nondirectional bomb method and the explosive pulse-gun method are
the two techniques in common use. The bomb that can be used in large flight
weight thrust chambers without modification consists of six 250 grains of
explosive powder (PETN,RDX,etc.) encased in a Teflon, nylon, or micarta
case. Detonation of the bomb is achieved either electrically or thermally.
Although the pulse gun requires modification of a combustion chamber, this
technique affords directional control, which is important to tangential modes
of high-frequency instability and allows several data points to be observed in a
single test run by installing several pulse guns on one combustion chamber.
Charges most frequently used are I 0, 15, 20, 40, and 80 grains of pistol powder.
Pulse guns can be fired in sequence, introducing successive pressure perturba
tions (approximately 150 msec apart), each of increasing intensity, into the
combustion chamber.
Control of Instabilities
The control of instabilities is an important task during the design and develop
ment of a rocket engine. The designer usually relies on prior experience with
similar engines and tests on new experimental engines. He also has available
analytical tools with which to simulate and evaluate the combustion process.
The design selection has to be proven in actual experiments to be free of instabil
ities over a wide range of transient and steady-state operating conditions. Some
of the experiments can be accomplished on a subscale rocket thrust chamber
that has a similar injector, but most tests have to be done on a full-scale engine.
The design features to control instabilities are different for the three types
described in Table 9-2. Chugging is usually avoided if there is no resonance in
the propellant feed system and its coupling with the elastic vehicle structure.
Increased injection pressure drop and the addition of artificial damping devices
in the propellant feed lines have been used successfully. Chugging and acous
tical instabilities sometimes relate to the natural frequency of a particular feed
system component that is free to oscillate, such as a loop of piping that can
vibrate or a bellows whose oscillations cause a pumping effect.
With the choice of the propellant combination usually fixed early in the
planning of a new engine, the designer can alter combustion feedback (depres
sing the driving mechanism) by altering injector details, (such as changing the
injector hole pattern, hole sizes or by increasing the injection pressure drop), or
alternatively by increasing acoustical damping within the combustion chamber.
Of the two methods, the second has been favored in recent years because it is
9.3. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 357
very effective, it is better understood, and theory fits. This leads to the applica
tion of injector face baffles, discrete acoustic energy absorption cavities, and
combustion chamber liners or changes in injector design, often by using a trial
and error approach.
Injector face baffles (see Fig. 9-6) were a widely accepted design practice in
the 1960s for overcoming or preventing high-frequency instability. Baffle
design is predicated on the assumption that the most severe instability, oscilla
tions, along witht he driving source, are located in or near the injector-atomi
zation zone at the injector end of the combustion chamber. The baffles
minimize influential coupling and amplification of gas dynamic forces within
the chamber. Obviously, baffles must be strong, have excellent resistance to
combustion temperatures (they are usually cooled by propellant), and must
protrude into the chamber enough to be effective, yet not so far as to act like an
individual combustion chamber with its own acoustical characteristics. The
number of baffle compartments is always odd. An even number of compart
ments enhances the standing modes of instability, with the baffles acting as
nodal lines separating regions of relatively high and low pressure. The design
and development of baffles remains highly empirical. Generally, baffles are
designed to minimize acoustical frequencies below 4000 Hz, since experience
has shown damaging instability is rare at frequencies above 4000 Hz.
MAIN INJECTOR ASSEMBLY
Spark Fluted oxidizer posts where
igniter hot hydrogen evaporates the oxygen
Fuel inlet from
~----hot gas manifold
,,,,,,.~--.:,.,,,_.--co1d hydrogen cavity
Five compartment
baffle with 75 cooled
injection posts
Primary injection
plate (transpiration
cooled) with 525 main
injection elements
Ignition flame tube
Oxygen /
from main
oxygen valve
FIGURE 9-6. Main injector assembly of the Space Shuttle main engine showing baffle
with five outer compartments. (Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne
Propulsion and Power.)
358 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
Various mechanisms of energy absorption or vibration damping exist in a
thrust chamber. Damping by well friction in combustion chambers is not sig
nificant. The exhaust nozzle produces the main damping of longitudinal mode
oscillations; the reflection of waves from the convergent nozzle entrance
departs from that of an ideal closed end. The principal damping source affect
ing propagation in the transverse plane is combustion itself. The great volu
metric change in going from liquid to burned gases and the momentum
imparted to a particle (solid or liquid) both constitute damping phenomena
in that they take energy from high instantaneous local pressures.
Unfortunately, the combustion process can generate a great deal more pressure
oscillation energy than is absorbed by its inherent damping mechanism.
Acoustical absorbers are applied usually as discrete cavities along or in the
wall of the combustion chamber near the injector end. Both act as a series of
Helmholtz resonators that remove energy from the vibratory system which
otherwise would maintain the pressure oscillations. Figure 9-7 shows the appli
cation of discrete cavities (interrupted slots) at the "corner" of the injector face.
The corner location usually minimizes the fabrication problems, and it is the
one location in a combustion chamber where a pressure antinode exists for all
/
~m~~lf1
Orifice
~ameter
LL+
,iL Mechanical analogy
Helmholtz resonator of acoustic cavity
Injector
Chamber
diameter D
Wall dividing One of eight
two cavities cavities
FIGURE 9-7. Diagram of acoustic energy absorber cavities at the periphery of an
injector. In this thrust chamber the cavity restriction is a slot (in the shape of sections
of a circular arc) and not a hole. Details of the chamber cooling channels, injector holes,
or internal feed passages are not shown.
9.3. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 359
resonant modes of vibration, including longitudinal, tangential, radial, and
combinations of these. Velocity oscillations are minimal at this point, which
favors absorber effectiveness. Transverse modes of instability are best damped
by locating absorbers at the corner location. Figure 9-7 also shows a
Helmholtz resonator cavity and its working principles in simple form.
Taking one resonator element, the mass of gas in the orifice with the volume
of gas behind it forms an oscillatory system analogous to the spring-mass
system shown (see Ref. 9-15). Even though Helmholtz resonator theory is
well understood, problems exist in applying the theory to conditions of high
pressure, temperature, chamber flow, and sound energy levels present when
screech occurs, end in properly tuning the cavities to the estimated frequencies.
Absorption cavities designed as Helmholtz resonators placed in or near the
injector face offer relatively high absorption bandwidth and energy absorbed
per cycle. The Helmholtz resonator (an enclosed cavity with a small passage
entry) dissipates energy twice each cycle (jets are formed upon inflow and
outflow). Modern design practice favors acoustic absorbers over baffles. The
storable propellant rocket engine shown in Fig. 8-2 has acoustic absorption
cavities in the chamber wall at a location next to the injector.
The resonance frequency f of a Helmholtz cavity can be estimated as
(9-2)
Here a is the local acoustic velocity, A is the restrictor area, A = (n/4)d2 , and
other symbols are as shownin Fig. 9-7. The !1L is an empirical factor between
0.05 and 0.9 to allow for additional oscillating gas mass. It varies with the L/d
ratio and the edge condition of the restricted orifice (sharp edge, rounded,
chamfered). Resonators in thrust chambers are tuned or designed to perform
their maximum damping at predicted frequencies.
Small changes in injector geometry or design can cause an unstable combus
tion to become stable and vice versa. New injectors, therefore, use the design
and geometry of proven, stable prior designs with the same propellants. For
example, the individual pattern of concentric tube injector elements used with
gaseous hydrogen and liquid oxygen (shown in Fig. 8-3) are likely to be more
stable, if the hydrogen gas is relatively warm and the injection velocity of the
hydrogen is at least 10 times larger than that of the liquid oxygen.
In summary, the designer needs to (I) use data from prior successful engines
and simulation programs to establish key design features and estimate the
likely resonances, (2) design the feed system and structure to avoid these reso
nances, (3) use a robust injector design that will provide good mixing and
dispersion of propellants and be resistant to disturbances, and (4) if needed,
include tuned damping devices (cavities) to overcome acoustic oscillations. To
validate that a particular thrust chamber is stable, it is necessary to test it over
the range of likely operating conditions without encountering instability. An
360 COMBUSTION OF LIQUID PROPELLANTS
analysis is needed to determine the maximum and minimum likely propellant
temperatures, maximum and minimum probable chamber pressures, and the
highest and lowest mixture ratios, using a propellant budget as shown in
Section 10.3. These limits then establish the variations of test conditions for
this test series. Because of our improved understanding, the amount of testing
needed to prove stability has been greatly reduced.
PROBLEMS
1. For a particular liquid propellant thrust chamber the following data are given:
Chamber presure 68 MPa
Chamber shape cylindrical
Internal chamber diameter 0.270 m
Length of cylindrical section 0.500 m
Nozzle convergent section angle 45°
Throat diameter and radius of wall curvature 0.050 m
Injector face Flat
Average chamber gas temperature 2800 K
Average chamber gas molecular weight 20 kg/kg-mo!
Specific heat ratio 1.20
Assume the gas composition and temperature to be uniform in the cylindrical cham
ber section. State any other assumptions that may be needed. Determine the approx
imate resonance frequencies in the first longitudinal mode, radial mode, and
tangential mode.
2. In Problem I, explain how these three frequencies will change with combustion
temperature, chamber pressure, chamber length, chamber diameter, and throat dia
meter.
3. Why does heat transfer increase during combustion instability?
4. Prepare a list of steps for undertaking a series of tests to validate the stability of a
new pressure-fed liquid bipropellant rocket engine.
5. Estimate the resonant frequency of a set of each of nine cavities similar to Fig. 9~7.
Here the chamber diameter D = 0.200 m, the slot width is 1.0 mm, and the width and
height of the cavity are each 20.0 mm. The walls separating the individual cavities are
10.0 mm thick. Assume L = 4.00 mm, tJ.L = 3.00 mm, and a= 1050 m/sec.
Answer: approximately 3138 cycles/sec.
REFERENCES
9~ 1. R. D. Sutton, W. S. Hines, and L. P. Combs, "Development and Application of a
Comprehensive Analysis of Liquid Rocket Combustion," AIAA Journal, Vol. IO,
No. 2, Feburary 1972, pp. 194-203.
9~2. K. K. Kuo, Principles of Combustion, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986.
REFERENCES 361
9-3. V. Yang and W. Anderson (Eds.) Liquid Rocket Engine Combustion Instability,
Vol. 169 of Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, AIAA, 1995, in particular
Chapter I, F.E.C. Culick and V. Yang, "Overview of Combustion Instabilities in
Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines."
9--4. B. R. Lawver, "Photographic Observations of Reactive Stream Impingement,"
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 17, No. 2, March-April 1980, pp. 134-
139.
9-5. M. Tanaka and W. Daimon, "ExplosionPhenomena from Contact ofHypergolic
Liquids," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. I, No. 4, 1984, pp. 314-316.
9-6. P. Y. Liang, R. J. Jensen, and Y. M. Chang, "Numerical Analysis of the SSME
Preburner Injector Atomization and Combustion Process," Journal of Propulsion
and Power, Vol. 3, No. 6, November-December 1987, pp. 508-513.
9-7. M. Habiballah, D. Lourme, and F. Pit, "PHEDRE-Numerical Model for
Combustion Stability Studies Applied to the Ariane Viking Engine," Journal of
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 7, No. 3, May-June 1991, pp. 322-329.
9-8. R. I. Sujith, G. A. Waldherr, J. I. Jagoda and B. T. Zinn, "Experimental
Investigation of the Evaporation of Droplets in Axial Acoustic Fields," Journal
of Propulsion and Power, AIAA, Vol. 16, No. 2, March-April 2000, pp. 278-285.
9-9. D. T. Hartje (Ed.), "Liquid Propellant Rocket Combustion Instability," NASA
SP-194, U.S. Government Printing Office, No. 3300-0450, 1972.
9-10. B. W. Oppenheim and S. Rubin," Advanced Pogo Analysis for Liquid Rockets,"
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 30, No. 3, May-June 1993.
9-11. G. About et al., "A New Approach of POGO Phenomenon Three-Dimensional
Studies on the Ariane 4 Launcher," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 15, Nos. 6 and 7,
1987, pp. 321-330.
9-12. T Shimura and K. Kamijo, "Dynamic Response of the LE-5 Rocket Engine
Liquid Oxygen Pump," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 22, No. 7,
March-April 1985.
9-13. E. Kirner, W. Oechslein, D. Thelemann and D. Wolf, "Development Status of
the Vulcain (HM 60) Thrust Chamber." A/AA Paper 90;2255, July 1990.
9-14. F. H. Reardon, "Combustion Stability Specification and Verification Procedure,"
CP/A Publication 247, October 1973.
9-15. T. L. Acker and C. E. Mitchell, "Combustion Zone-Acoustic Cavity Interactions
in Rocket Combustors," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 10, No 2, March
April 1994, pp. 235-243.
CHAPTER 10
TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN,
ENGINE CONTROLS, CALIBRATION,
INTEGRATION, AND OPTIMIZATION
In this chapter we first discuss a complex high-precision, high-speed, rotating
subsystem, namely the turbopump. Only some high-thrust engines have turbo
pumps. This chapter contains an overall engine discussion which applies to all
engines. This includes the liquid propellant rocket engine's design, perfor
mance, controls, calibration, propellant budget, integration, and optimization.
10.1. TURBO PUMPS
The assembly of a turbine with one or more pumps is called a turbopump. Its
purpose is to raise the pressure of the flowing propellant. Its principal subsys
tems are a hot gas powered turbine and one or two propellant pumps. It is a high
precision rotating machine, operating at high shaft speed with severe thermal
gradients and large pressure changes, it usually is located next to a thrust
chamber, which is a potent source of noise and vibration.
This turbopump feed system and its several cycles have been discussed in
Section 6.6 and Fig. 6-2 categorizes the various common turbopump config
urations. Turbopumps or installation of turbopumps in rocket engines are
shown in Figs. 1-4, 6-1, 6-12, 8-19, 10-1, 10-2, 10-3, and 10-11; they are
discussed in Refs. 6-1 and 10-1. A schematic diagram of different design
arrangements of pumps and turbines for common turbopump types can be
seen in Fig. 10-4. Table 10-1 shows lists parameters of pumps and turbines
of two large rocket engines.
Specific nomenclature and terminology used in the next few paragraphs will
be explained later in this Chapter. In Fig. 10-1 a simple turbopump with a
362
TABLE 10-1. Turbopump Characteristics
Engine: Space Shuttle Main Engine"
Feed System Cycle: Modified Staged Combustion Cycle Modified Staged Combustion Cycle
Propellants: Liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen Liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen
Pumps
Designation" LPOTP LP FTP HPOTP HP FTP HP FTP HPOTP
Type Axial flow Axial flow Dual inlet Radial flow Radial flow Radial flow
No. of impeller stages I+ Id 3 2 l + Id
No. of aux. or inducers I I I I l
Flow rate (kg/sec) 425 70.4 509 50.9 70.4 35.7 211.5 46.7d
Inlet pressure (MPa) 0.6 0.9 2.70 NA 1.63 0.343 0.736 18.2d
Discharge pressure (MPa) 2.89 2.09 27.8 47.8d 41.0 26.5 18.2 26.7d
Pump efficiency (%) 68 75 72 75d 75 69.9 76.5 78.4d
Turbines
No. of stages 6 2 3 2
Type Hydraulic Reaction- Reaction- Reaction- Reaction Reaction
LOX driven impulse impulse impulse impulse impulse
Flow rate (kg/sec) 27.7 66.8 33.1 15.4
Inlet temperature (K) !05.5 264 756 1000 871 863
Inlet pressure (MPa) 26.2 29.0 32.9 32.9 20.5 19.6
Pressure ratio NA 1.29 1.54 1.50 143 1.37
Turbine efficiency(%) 69 60 74 79 73.2 48.I
Turbine speed (rpm) 5020 15,670 22,300 34,270 41600 18300
Turbine power (kW) 1120 2290 15,650 40,300 25,350 7012
Mixture ratio, 0/F LOX only H2 only ~0.62 ~0.88 ~ 0.7 ~ 0.7
aData courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power, at flight power level of 104.5% of design thrust.
hData courtesy of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.
'LPOTP, low-pressure oxidizer turbopump; HPFTP, high-pressure fuel turbopump.
dBoost impeller stage for oxygen flow to preburners or gas generator.
~
w
364 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
Hot gas Entry slots
inlet flange to turbine
nozzles
Hydrostatic
bearing
Internal
Turbine gas
passages for
discharge flange
supplying propellant
to bearings
Pump volute with
changing cross
section
Turbine disk
Shrouded
impeller
Shaft seal
Angular ball
bearing for
axial loads
Inducer
impeller
Nut holding
Gas inlet
inducer to
manifold and
shaft
turbine housing
i
Pump Pump
suction housing Pump discharge
flange flange
FIGURE 10-1. Cut-away view of an experimental turbopump demonstrator with a
single-stage liquid oxygen pump impeller, an inducer impeller, and a single-stage turbine
(one row of blades) on the same shaft. (Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne
Propulsion and Power.)
single-stage propellant pump (with an inducer impeller ahead of the main
impeller) is driven by a single-stage axial-flow turbine. The hot combustion
gases, which drive this turbine, are burned in a separate gas generator (or a
precombustion chamber or preburner) at a mixture ratio that gives gases
between 900 and 1200 K; this is sufficiently cool, so that the hot turbine hard
ware (blades, nozzles, manifolds, or disks) still have sufficient strength without
needing forced cooling. The gases are expanded (accelerated) in an annular set
of converging~diverging supersonic turbine nozzles, which are cast into the cast
turbine inlet housing. The gases then enter a set of rotating blades, which are
mounted on a rotating wheel or turbine disk. The blades remove the tangential
energy of the gas flow. The exhaust gas velocity exiting from the blades is
relatively low and its direction is essentially parallel to the shaft. The pump
is driven by the turbine through an interconnecting solid shaft. The propellant
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 365
enters the pump through an inducer, a special impeller where the pressure of the
propellant is raised only slightly (perhaps 5 to 10% of the total pressure rise).
This is just enough pressure so that there will be no cavitation as the flow enters
the main pump impeller. Most of the kinetic energy given to the flow by the
pump impeller is converted into hydrostatic pressure in the diffusers (the dif
fuser vanes are not clearly visible, since they are inclined) and/or volutes of the
pump. The two hydrostatic bearings support the shaft radially. All bearings
and shaft seals create heat as they run. They are cooled and lubricated by a
small flow of propellant, which is supplied from the pump discharge through
drilled passages. One bearing (near the pump) is very cold and the other is hot,
since it is close to the hot turbine. The angular ball bearing accepts the axial net
loads from the unbalanced hydrodynamic pressures around the shrouded
impeller, the inducer, and also the turbine blades or the turbine disk.
A novel, high speed, compact, and light weight liquid hydrogen turbopump
is shown in Fig. 10-2 and in Ref 10.2. It is intended to be used with a new
upper stage hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine with a thrust of about 50,000 !bf
(22.4 kN), a delivered engine specific impulse of 450.6 sec at an engine mixture
ratio of 6.0. This engine will run on an expander cycle, with a chamber pressure
of 1375 psia (96. 7 kg/m2 ) and a maximum internal fuel pressure of 4500 psi
(323.4 kg/m2 ) at the fuel pump discharge. The unique single-piece titanium
rotor turns nominally at 166,700 rpm, has two machined sets of pump
vanes, a machined inducer impeller, a set of machined radial inflow turbine
Housing for filtered
bearing supply
I
Turbine gas
inlet flange
/
FIGURE 10-2. Exploded view of an advanced high-speed, two-stage liquid hydrogen
fuel pump driven by a radial flow turbine. (Copied with permission of Pratt & Whitney,
a division of United Technologies; adapted from Ref. 10-2.)
366 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
blades, and radial as well as axial bearing surfaces. A small filtered flow of
hydrogen lubricates the hydrostatic bearing surfaces. The cast pump housing
has internal crossover passages between stages. The unique radial in-flow tur
bine (3.2 in. dia.) produces about 5900 hp at an efficiency of 78%. The hydro
gen pump impellers are only 3.0 in. diameter and produce a pump discharge
pressure of about 4500 psi at a fuel flow of 16 lbm/sec and an efficiency of
67%. A high pump inlet pressure of about 100 psi is needed to assure cavita
tion-free operation. The turbopump can operate at about 50% flow (at 36%
discharge pressure and 58% of rated speed). The number of pieces to be
assembled is greatly reduced, compared to a more conventional turbopump,
thus enhancing its inherent reliability.
The geared turbopump in Fig. 10-3 has a higher turbine and pump efficien
cies, because the speed of the two-stage turbine is higher than the pump shaft
speeds and the turbine is smaller. The auxiliary power package (e.g., hydraulic
pump) was used only in an early application. The precision ball bearings and
Oxygen pump
ma,n impeller
Fuel
outlet
2-stage spur
reduction gears
FIGURE 10-3. Typical geared turbopump assembly used on the RS-27 engine (Delta I
and II Launch Vehicles) with liquid oxygen and RP-I propellants. (Courtesy of The
Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power.)
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 367
seals on the turbine shaft can be seen, but the pump bearings and seals are not
visible in this figure.
Approach to Turbopump Preliminary Design
With all major rocket engine components the principal criteria (high perfor
mance or efficiency, minimum mass, high reliability, and low cost) have to be
weighted and prioritized for each vehicle mission. For example, high efficiency
and low mass usually mean low design margins, and thus lower reliability. A
higher shaft speed will allow a lower mass turbopump, but it cavitates more
readily and requires a higher tank pressure and heavier vehicle tanks (which
often outweigh the mass savings in the turbopump) in order to have acceptable
life and reliability.
The engine requirements give the initial basic design goals for the turbo
pump, namely propellant flow, the pump outlet or discharge pressure (which
has to be equal to the chamber pressure plus the pressure drops in the piping,
valves, cooling jacket, and injector), the desired best engine cycle (gas generator
or staged combustion, as shown in Fig. 6-9), the start delay, and the need for
restart or throttling, if any. Also, the propellant properties ( density, vapor
pressure, viscosity, or boiling point) must be known. Some of the design cri
teria are explained in Refs. 6-1 and 10-3, and basic texts on turbines and
pumps are listed as Refs. 10-4 to 10-8.
There are several design variations or geometrical arrangements for trans
mitting turbine power to one or more propellant pumps; some are shown
schematically in Fig. 10-4. If the engine has propellants of similar density
(such as liquid oxygen and RP-1), the fuel and oxidizer pumps will have similar
shaft speeds and can usually be placed on a common shaft driven by a single
turbine (F-1, RS-27/Delta Fig. 10-3, Atlas, or Redstone engines). If there is a
mismatch between the optimum pump speed and the optimum turbine speed
(which is usually higher), it may save inert mass and turbine drive gas mass to
interpose a gear reduction between their shafts. See Fig. 6-11. For the last two
decades designers have preferred to use direct drive, which avoids the compli
cation of a gear case but at a penalty in efficiency and the amount of turbine
drive propellant gas required. See Figs. 6-12, 10-1, or 10-2.
If the densities are very different (e.g., liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen),
the pump head rise* (head = !1p/ p) is much higher for the lower-density pro
pellant, and the hydrogen pump usually has to have more than one impeller or
one stage and will typically operate at a higher shaft speed; in this case separate
* Pump head means the difference between pump discharge and pump suction head. Its units are
meters or feet. The head is the height of a column of liquid with equivalent pressure at its bottom.
The conversion from pounds per square inch into feet of head is: (X) psi = 144(X)/density (lb/ft3 ).
To convert pascals (N/m2 ) of pressure into column height (m), divide by the density (kg/m3 ) and g0
(9.806 m/sec2 ).
368 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
G
Two pumps on same shaft
with outboard turbine.
Shaft goes through fuel pump inlet.
Two turbines, each with one pump.
Gas flow shown in parallel.
(alternate is gas flow in series, first through
one and then the other turbine).
Direct drive with turbine in middle.
G
Shaft goes through turbine
discharge manifold.
With gear case, turbine can
Two main pumps and two booster
run faster. The two pumps
pumps, each with its own gas turbine
have different speeds.
FIGURE 10--4. Simplified diagrams of different design arrangements of turbopumps. F
is fuel pump, 0 is oxidizer pump, T is turbine, G is hot gas, and GC is gear case.
turbopumps for the fuel and the oxidizer can give the lowest energy and overall
mass (J-2, SSME, LE-7, Vulcain 60).
Usually, the preliminary analysis for the pump is done first. Avoiding exces
sive cavitation sets a key pump parameter, namely the maximum shaft speed.
This is the highest possible shaft speed, which in turn allows the lightest tur
bopump mass, without excessive cavitation in the pump. If excessive cavitation
occurs at the leading edge of the first impeller (inducer or main impeller), then
the flow will become unsteady and variable, leading to lower thrust and pos
sible combustion instability. The amount of pressure in the vehicle (gas pres
sure in propellant tank plus the static elevation pressure) that can be made
available to the engine (at the pump inlet) for suppressing cavitation has to be
larger than the impeller vanes' own pressure limit to cavitate. This allows us
then to determine the shaft speed, which in turn can establish the approximate
pump efficiencies, impeller tip speed (usually limited by the material strength of
the impeller), number of pump stages, key dimensions of the impeller, and the
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 369
pump power requirements. All this will be discussed further (including key
equations) in the pump section of this chapter.
The key turbine parameter can be estimated, because the power output of
the turbine essentially has to equal the power demand of the pump. If the pump
is driven directly, that is without a gear case, then the pump speed and the
turbine speed are equal. From the properties of the turbine drive gas (tempera
ture, specific heat, etc.), the strength limits of the turbine materials, and the
likely pressure drop, it is possible to determine the basic dimensions of the
blades (pitch line velocity, turbine nozzle outlet velocity, number of rows
(stages) of blades, turbine type, or turbine efficiency). The particular arrange
ment or geometry of the major turbopump components is related to their
selection process. Most propellant pumps have a single-stage main impeller.
For liquid hydrogen with its low density, a two- or three-stage pump is nor
mally needed. Usually some design limit is reached which requires one or more
iterations, each with a new changed approach or parameter. The arrangement
of the major turbopump components (Fig. I 0--4) is also influenced by the
position of the bearings on the shaft. For example, we do not want to place
a bearing in front of an impeller inlet because it will cause turbulence, distort
the flow distribution, raise the suction pressure requirement, and make cavita
tion more likely to occur. Also, bearings positioned close to a turbine will
experience high temperatures, which influences the lubrication by propellant
and may demand more cooling of the bearings.
The use of booster pumps allows lower tank pressure, and thus lower inert
vehicle mass, and provides adequate suction pressures to the main pump inlet.
Booster pumps are used in the Space Shuttle main engine and the Russian RD
! 70, as seen in Figs. 6--12 and 10-11. Some booster pumps have been driven by
a liquid booster turbine using a small flow of high-pressure liquid propellant
that has been tapped off the discharge side of the main pump. The discharged
turbine liquid then mixes with the main propellant flow at the discharge of the
booster pump.
Later in this section a few of the equations that apply to the steady-state
(full thrust) operating condition will be described. However, no detailed dis
cussion will be given of the transient starting conditions, such as the filling of
pipes, pumps, or manifolds with liquid propellants, or the filling of turbines
and their manifolds with high-pressure gas. These dynamic conditions can be
complex, are related to the combustion reactions, and are sometimes difficult
to analyze, yet they are very significant in the proper and safe operation of the
engine. Each major rocket engine manufacturer has developed some methodol
ogy, usually analysis and hydraulic models, for these system dynamics that are
often peculiar to specific engines and hardware (see Refs. 10-3 and 10--4).
Mass is at a premium in all flying installations, and the feed system is
selected to have a minimum combined mass of tubines, pumps, gas generator,
valves, tanks, and gas generator propellants. Some of the considerations in the
design of turbopumps are the thermal stresses, warpage due to thermal expan
sion or contraction, axial loads, adequate clearances to prevent rubbing yet
370 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
minimize leakage, alignment of bearings, provisions for dynamic balancing of
rotating parts, mounting on an elastic vehicle frame without inducing external
forces, and avoiding undue pressure loads in the liquid and gas pipes.
Vibrations of turbopumps have caused problems during development. The
analyses of the various vibrations (shaft, turbine blades, liquid oscillations, gas
flow oscillations, or bearing vibrations) are not given here. At the critical speed
the natural structural resonance frequency of the rotating assembly (shaft,
impellers, turbine disk, etc.) coincides with the rotation operating speed. A
slight unbalance can be amplified to cause significant shaft deflections (in
bending), bearing failure, and other damage. The operating speed therefore
is usually lower and sometimes higher than the critical speed. A large diameter
stiff shaft, rigid bearings, and stiff bearing supports will increase this critical
speed, and damping (such as the liquid lubricant film in the bearing) will reduce
the vibration amplitude. Also, this critical shaft frequency or the operating
speed should not coincide with and excite other natural vibration frequencies,
such as those of various parts (piping, bellows, manifolds, or injector dome).
The solving of various internal vibrations problems, such as whirl in bearings
and blade vibrations, is reported in Ref. 10-5.
Bearings in most existing turbopumps are high precision, special alloy ball
or roller bearings. Some ball bearings can take both radial and axial loads. Ball
and roller bearings are limited in the loads and speeds at which they can
operate reliably. In some turbopump designs this maximum bearing speed
determines the minimum size of turbopump, rather than the cavitation limit
of the pump. More recently, we use hydrostatic bearings where the shaft rides
on a high-pressure fluid film; they have good radial load capacity, can provide
some damping of oscillations and a stiff support. Axial loads (due to pressure
unbalance on impellers and turbine blades) can be taken by special hydrostatic
bearings. Since there is no direct contact between rolling and stationary assem
blies, there is little or no wear and the life expectancy of these hydrostatic
bearings is long. However, there is rubbing contact and wear at low speeds,
namely during start or shutdown (see Ref. 10-6).
Cooling and lubricating the bearings and seals is essential for preventing
bearing problems. A small flow of one of the propellants is used.
Hydrocarbon fuels are usually good lubricants and hydrogen is a good coolant,
but a marginal lubricant. If an oxidizer is used as the coolant and lubricant,
then the materials used for bearings and seals have to be resistant to oxidation
when heated during operation.
If the turbopump is part of a reusable rocket engine, it becomes more
complex. For example, it can include provision to allow for inspection and
automatic condition evaluation after each mission or flight. This can include an
inspection of bearings through access holes for horoscope instruments, check
ing for cracks in highly stressed parts (turbine blade roots or hot-gas high
pressure manifolds), or the measurement of shaft torques (to detect possible
binding or warpage).
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 371
Pumps
Classification and Description. The centrifugal pump is generally consid
ered the most suitable for pumping propellant in large rocket units. For the
large flows and high pressures involved, they are efficient as well as economical
in terms of mass and space requirement.
Figure 10-5 is a schematic drawing of a centrifugal pump. Fluid entering the
impeller, which is essentially a wheel with spiral curved vanes rotating within a
casing, is accelerated within the impeller channels and leaves the impeller per
iphery with a high velocity to enter the volute, or collector, and thereafter the
diffuser, where conversion from kinetic energy (velocity) to potential energy
(pressure) takes place. In some pumps the curved diffuser vanes are upstream
of the collector. The three-dimensional hydraulic design of impeller vanes,
diffuser vanes, and volute passages can be accomplished by computer pro
grams to give high efficiency and adequate strength. Internal leakage, or cir
culation between the high-pressure (discharge) side and the low-pressure
(suction) side of an impeller, is held to a minimum by maintaining close clear
ances between the rotating and stationary parts at the seals or wear ring sur
faces. External leakage along the shaft is minimized or prevented by the use of
a shaft seal. Single-stage pumps (one impeller only) are stress-limited in the
pressure rise they can impart to the liquid, and multiple-stage pumps are there
fore needed for high pump head,* such as with liquid hydrogen. References 10-
5 to 10-7 give information on different pumps. There is a free passage of flow
through the pump at all times, and no positive means for shutoff are provided.
The pump characteristics, that is, the pressure rise, flow, and efficiency, are
functions of the pump speed, the impeller, the vane shape, and the casing
configuration. Figure I 0-6 shows a typical set of curves for centrifugal
Wear ring surface
FIGURE 10---5. Simplified schematic half cross section of a typical centrifugal pump.
*See footnote on page 367.
900 --
800 I - -- V-2 fuel pump ,-
I/ t-. ....... ! - ,.._ - - V-2 oxygen pump
100 ._ -
90 700 I -
~ g_ 8 70 0 -
Head/
\ -- Efftcie-ncyi....
.I
_
uI
'-- -~ -
I""--, i-......_
r_...
5~ i 6 50 0
-..... ........
-~j.l..
- ~
c~ :.- '-" r~
-
,_. ...
t-. -
I
,_ 1.......:
-L,, .. v.. . ~
"'- ~
~40 [:,-.
I b ~
a.30 ui::= Required net positive suction head ..... -- -I L'-~ r;... "- 400
~ 20 l~r - .--'----~ L..- .........
10
I,' -t---- "'!>Brake horsepower
0 -...... ~ ! I --
200 -
--
---
._ ..._ ..._
- __L ._ '--ii. I----
100 ...... ~ I
!
OO 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 O
Discharge, gallons per minute
FIGURE 10-6. Water test performance curves of the centrifugal pumps of the German V-2 rocket engine. The propellants are
diluted 75% ethyl alcohol and liquid oxygen.
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 373
pumps. The negative slope on the head versus flow curve indicates a stable
pump behavior. References 10-7 and 10-8 describe the development of a
smaller turbopump and the testing of a spiral high-speed first-stage impeller,
called an inducer.
A shrouded impeller has a shroud or cover (in the shape of a surface of
revolution) on top of the vanes as shown in Figs. 10-1, 10-3, and 10-5. This
type usually has higher stresses and lower leakage around the impeller. In an
unshrouded impeller or turbine the vanes are not covered as seen in the turbine
vanes in Fig. 10.2.
Pump Parameters. This section outlines some of the important parameters
and features that have to be considered in the design of rocket propellant
centrifugal pumps under steady flow conditions.
The required pump flow is established by the rocket design for a given thrust,
effective exhaust velocity, propellant densities, and mixture ratio. In addition
to the flow required by the thrust chamber, the propellant consumption of the
gas generator, and in some designs also a bypass around the turbine and
auxiliaries have to be considered in determining the pump flows. The required
pump discharge pressure is determined from the chamber pressure and the
hydraulic losses in valves, lines, cooling jacket, and injectors (see Eq. 6-15).
To obtain the rated flow at the rated pressure, an additional adjustable pres
sure drop for a control valve or orifice is usually included which permits a
calibration adjustment or change in the required feed pressure. A regulation of
the pump speed can also change the required adjustable pressure drop. As
described in Section 10.6, this adjustment of head and flow is necessary to
allow for hydraulic and performance tolerances on pumps, valves, injectors,
propellant density, and so on.
It is possible to predict the pump performance at various speeds if the per
formance is known at any given speed. Because the fluid velocity in a given
pump is proportional to the pump speed N, the flow quantity or discharge Q is
also proportional to the speed and the head H is proportional to the square of
the speed. This gives the following relations:
Q (flow) ~ N (rpm or rad/sec)
H (pump head) ~ N2 (10--1)
P (pump power) ~ N3
From these relations it is possible to derive a parameter called the specific
speed Ns. It is a dimensionless number derived from a dimensional analysis of
pump parameters as shown in Ref. 10-9.
(10--2)
374 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
Any set of consistent units will satisfy the equation: for example, N in radians
per second, Qin m3 /s, g 0 as 9.8 m/sec2 , and Hin meters. The subscript e refers
to the maximum efficiency condition. In U.S. pump practice it has become the
custom to delete g 0, express N in rpm, and Q in gallons per minute or ft3 /sec.
Much of the existing U.S. pump data is in these units. This leads to a modified
form of Eq. 10-2, where Ns is not dimensionless, namely
(10--3)
The factor 21.2 applies when N is in rpm, Q is in ft3 /sec, and His in feet. For
each range of specific speed, a certain shape and impeller geometry has proved
most efficient, as shown in Table 10-2. Because of the low density, hydrogen
can be pumped effectively by axial flow devices.
The impeller tip speed in centrifugal pumps is limited by design and material
strength considerations to about 60 to 450 m/sec or roughly 200 to 1475 ft/sec.
With titanium (lower density than steel) and machined unshrouded impellers a
tip speed of over 2150 ft/sec is now possible and used on the pumps shown in
Fig. 10-2. For cast impellers this limiting value is lower than for machined
impellers. This maximum impeller tip speed determines the maximum head
that can be obtained from a single stage. The impeller vane tip speed u is the
product of the shaft speed, expressed in radians per second, and the impeller
radius and is related to the pump head by
(10--4)
where i/1 has values between 0.90 and 1.10 for different designs. For many
pumps, i/1 = 1.0.
TABLE 10-2. Pump Types
Impeller type
Radial Francis Mixed flow Near axial Axial
Basic shape
(half section)
.11110 1\\\\<
Specific speed Ns
U.S. nomenclature 500-1000 1000-2000 2000-3000 3000-6000 Above 8000
SI consistent units 0.2-0.3 0.4 0.6-0.8 1.0-2.0 Above 2.5
Efficiency% 50-80 60-90 70-92 76-88 75-82
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 375
The flow quantity defines the impeller inlet and outlet areas according to the
equation of continuity. The diameters obtained from this equation should be in
the proportion indicated by the diagrams for a given specific speed in Table
10-2. The continuity equation for an incompressible liquid is
(10-5)
where the subscripts refer to the impeller inlet and outlet sections, all areas
being measured normal to their respective flow velocity. The inlet velocity v
1
ranges usually between 2 and 6 m/sec or 6.5 to 20 ft/sec and the outlet velocity
v between 3 and 15 m/sec or 10 to 70 ft/sec. For a compressible liquid, such as
2
liquid hydrogen, the density will change with pressure. The continuity equation
then is:
( I 0-6)
The head developed by the pump will then also depend on the change in
density.
The pump performance is limited by cavitation, a phenomenon that occurs
when the static pressure at any point in a fluid flow passage becomes less than
the fluid's vapor pressure. The formation of vapor bubbles causes cavitation.
These bubbles collapse when they reach a region of higher pressure, that is,
when the static pressure in the fluid is above the vapor pressure. In centrifugal
pumps cavitation is most likely to occur behind the leading edge of the pump
impeller vane at the inlet because this is the point at which the lowest absolute
pressure is encountered. The excessive formation of vapor causes the pump
discharge mass flow to diminish and fluctuate and can reduce the thrust and
make the combustion erratic and dangerous (see Ref. 10-10).
When the bubbles travel along the pump impeller surface from the low
pressure region (where they are formed) to the downstream higher-pressure
region, the bubbles collapse. The sudden collapses create local high-pressure
pulses that have caused excessive stresses in the metal at the impeller surface. In
most rocket applications this cavitation erosion is not as serious as in water or
chemical pumps, because the cumulative duration is relatively short and the
erosion of metal on the impeller is not usually extensive. It has been a concern
with test facility transfer pumps.
The required suction head (Hs)R is the limit value of the head at the pump
inlet (above the local vapor pressure); below this value cavitation in the impel
ler will not occur. It is a function of the pump and impeller design and its value
increases with flow as can be seen in Fig. I 0-6. To avoid cavitation the suction
head above vapor pressure required by the pump (Hsh must always be less than
the available or net positive suction head furnished by the line up to the pump
(H )A, that is, (Hsh ::; (Hs)A- The required suction head above vapor pressure
5
can be determined from the suction specific speed S :
S = 21.2Nvf 'r >> ! e/(HJR3/ 4 (10-7)
376 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
The suction specific speed S depends on the quality of design and the specific
speed N as shown in Table I 0-2. The suction specific speed S has a value
5,
between 5000 and 60,000 when using ft-lbf units. For pumps with poor suction
characteristics it has values near 5000, for the best pump designs without
cavitation it has values near 10,000 and 25,000, and for pumps with limited
and controllable local cavitation it has values above 40,000. In Eq. 10-7 the
required suction head (Hsh is usually defined as the critical suction head at
which the developed pump discharge head has been diminished arbitrarily by
2% in a pump test with increasing throttling in the suction side. Turbopump
development has, over the last several decades, led to impeller designs which
can operate successfully with considerably more cavitation than the arbitrary
and commonly accepted 2% head loss limit. Inducers are now designed to run
stably with extensive vapor bubbles near the leading edge of their vanes, but
these bubbles collapse at the trailing end of these vanes. Inducers now can have
S values above 80,000. A discussion of the design of impeller blades can be
found in Ref. 10-9.
The head that is available at the pump suction flange is called the net positive
suction head or available suction head above vapor pressure (Hs)A- It is an
absolute head value determined from the tank pressure (the absolute gas pres
sure in the tank above the liquid level), the elevation of the propellant level
above the pump inlet, the friction losses in the line between tank and pump,
and the vapor pressure of the fluid. When the flying vehicle is undergoing
accelerations, the head due to elevation must be corrected accordingly. These
various heads are defined in Fig. 10-7. The net positive suction head (Hs)A is
the maximum head available for suppressing cavitation at the inlet to the
pumps:
(Hs)A = Htank + Helevation - Hrriction - Hvapor (10-8)
To avoid pump cavitation, (H,)A has to be higher than (Hsh· If additional
head is required by the pump, the propellant may have to be pressurized by
external means, such as by the addition of another pump in series (called a
booster pump) or by gas pressurization of the propellant tanks. This latter
method requires thicker tank walls and, therefore, heavier tanks, and a bigger
gas-pressurizing system. For example, the oxygen tank of the German V-2 was
pressurized to 2.3 atm, partly to avoid pump cavitation. For a given value of
(Hs)A> propellants with high vapor pressure require correspondingly higher
tank pressures and heavier inert tank masses. For a given available suction
head (Hs)A, a pump with a low required suction pressure usually permits
designs with high shaft speeds, small diameter, and low pump inert mass. A
small value of (Hs)R is desirable because it may permit a reduction of the
requirements for tank pressurization and, therefore, a lower inert tank mass.
The value of (Hs)R will be small if the impeller and fluid passages are well
designed and if the shaft speed N is low. A very low shaft speed, however,
requires a large diameter pump, which will be excessively heavy. The trend in
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 377
Friction loss Hf
Atmospheric .
pressure ~1A·tm~,olsop~h eric
1 Absolute tank j pressure
--------. ~-L Vapor pressure
pressure, H,-J, of fluid, HI/Gpor
Gage tank
gas pressure
Gas
pressure
Fluid
Available gage
level Absolute static pressure at
head at pump pump inlet
inlet with with flow
zero flow
Net positive suction
Absolute available head (NPSH) or
dynamic and
maximum head
static head at
available for
pump inlet
Elevation surpressing cavitation
with flow
head in the pump
Hr~votio11 (Hs).,.
Pressure reference line
FIGURE 10--7. Definition of pump suction head.
selecting centrifugal pumps for rocket application has been to select the highest
shaft speed that gives a pump with a low value of (Hsh, does not require
excessive tank pressurization or other design complications, and thereby per
mits relatively lightweight pump design. This places a premium on pumps with
good suction characteristics.
There have been some low-thrust, low-flow, experimental engines that have
used positive displacement pumps, such as diaphragm pumps, piston pumps,
or rotary displacement pumps (gear and vane pumps). For low values of Ns
these pumps have much better efficiencies, but their discharge pressures fluc
tuate with each stroke and they are noisy.
One method to provide a lightweight turbopump with minimal tank pres
sure is to use an inducer, which is a special pump impeller usually on the same
shaft and rotating at the same speed as the main impeller. It has a low head rise
and therefore a relatively high specific speed. Inducer impellers are immediately
upstream of the main impeller. They are basically axial flow pumps with a
spiral impeller, and many will operate under slightly cavitating conditions.
The inducer stage's head rise (typically, 2 to 10% of the total pump head)
has to be just large enough to suppress cavitation in the main pump impeller;
this allows a smaller, lighter, higher-speed main pump. Figures 10-3 and 10-8
show an inducer and Ref. 10-8 describes the testing of one of them.
378 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
FIGURE 10-8. Fuel pump inducer impeller of the Space Shuttle main engine low
pressure fuel turbopump. It has a diameter about 10 in., a nominal hydrogen flow of
148.6 lbm/sec, a suction pressure of 30 psi, a discharge pressure of 280 psi at 15,765 rpm,
an efficiency of 77%, and a suction specific speed of 39,000 when tested with water.
(Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power.)
In some rockets the inert mass of the turbopump and tank system can be
further reduced by putting the inducer impeller into a separate low-power, low
speed booster turbopump, driven by its own separate turbine. In the Space
Shuttle main engine there are two such low-pressure-rise turbopumps, as
shown in the flow diagram of Fig. 6--4 and the engine view of Fig. 6-1. This
allows the inducer impeller to be operated at an optimum (lower) shaft speed.
Influence of Propellants. For the same power and mass flow, the pump head
is inversely proportional to the propellant density. Since pumps are basically
constant-volume flow machines, the propellant with the highest density re
quires less head, less power and thus allows a smaller pump assembly.
Because many of the propellants are dangerous to handle, special provision
has to be made to prevent any leakage through the shaft seals. With sponta
neously ignitable propellants the leakages can lead to fires in the pump com
partment and may cause explosions. Multiple seals are often used with a
drainage provision that safely removes or disposes of any propellants that
flow past the first seal. Inert-gas purges of seals have also been used to remove
hazardous propellant vapors. The sealing of corrosive propellants puts very
severe requirements on the sealing materials and design. With cryogenic pro
pellants the pump bearings are usually lubricated by the propellant, smce
lubricating oil would freeze at the low pump hardware temperature.
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 379
Centrifugal pumps should operate at the highest possible pump efficiency.
This efficiency increases with the volume flow rate and reaches a maximum
value of about 90% for very large flows (above 0.05 m3 /sec) and specific speeds
above about 2500 (see Refs. 6-1 and 10-9). Most propellant pump efficiencies
are between 30 and 70%. The pump efficiency is reduced by surface roughness
of casing and impellers, the power consumed by seals, bearings, and stuffing
boxes, and by excessive wear ring leakage and poor hydraulic design. The
pump efficiency rJp is defined as the fluid power divided by the pump shaft
power Pp:
TJp = pQ!!.H/Pp (1~9)
A correction factor of 550 ft-lbf/hp has to be added if Pp is given in horse
power, H in feet, and Q in ft3 /sec. When using propellants, the pump power
has to be multiplied by the density ratio if the required power for water tests is
to be determined.
Example 10-1. Determine the shaft speed and the overall impeller dimensions for a
liquid oxygen pump which delivers 500 lb/sec of propellant at a discharge pressure of
1000 psia and a suction pressure of 14.7 psia. The oxygen tank is pressurized to 35 psia.
Neglect the friction in the suction pipe and the suction head changes due to acceleration
and propellant consumption. The initial tank level is 15 ft above the pump suction inlet.
SOLUTION. The density of liquid oxygen is 71.2 lbm/ft3 at its boiling point. The
volume flow will be 500/71.2 = 7.022 ft3 /sec. The vapor pressure of the oxygen is 1
atm = 14.7 psi= 29.8 ft. The suction head is 35 x 144/71.2 = 70.8 ft. From Eq. J(}-8
the available suction head is 70.8 + 14.7 = 85.5 ft. The available suction head above
vapor pressure is (Hs)A = 70.8 + 14.7 - 0 - 29.8 = 55.7 ft. The discharge head is
1000 x 144/71.2 = 2022 ft. The head delivered by the pump 1s then
2022 - 85.5 = 1937 ft.
The required suction head will be taken as 80% of the available suction head in order
to provide a margin of safety for cavitation (Hs)R = 0.80 x 85.5 = 68.4 ft. Assume a
suction specific speed of 15,000, a reasonable value if no test data are available. From
Eq. 10-7 solve for the shaft speed N:
S = 21.2N/Q/(H 4 = 21.2NJ7.022/68.4°·75 = 15,000
5)~
Solve for N = 6350 rpm or 664.7 rad/sec.
The specific speed, from Eq. 10-3, is
NS= 21.2N/Q/H314 = 21.2 x 6350J7.022/1937°75 = 1222
According to Table 10-2, the impeller shape for this value of Ns will be a Francis type.
The impeller discharge diameter D can be evaluated from the tip speed by Eq. l(}-4:
2
u = ifrJ2g t::,.H = 1.0J2 x 32.2 x 1937 = 353 ft/ sec
0
D = 353 x 2/664.7 = 1.062 ft= 12.75 in.
2
380 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
The impeller inlet diameter D can be found from Eq. 10-5 by assuming a typical inlet
1
velocity of 15 ft/sec and a shaft cross section 5.10 in. 2 (2.548 in. diameter).
A= Q/v 1 = 7.022/15 = 0.468 ft2 = 67.41 in.2
A= inDf + 5.10 = 67.41 + 5.10 = 72.51 in.2
D = 9.61 in. (internal flow passage diameter)
1
This is enough data to draw a preliminary sketch of the impeller.
Turbines
The turbine must provide adequate shaft power for driving the propellant
pumps (and sometimes also auxiliaries) at the desired speed and torque. The
turbine derives its energy from the expansion of a gaseous working fluid
through fixed nozzles and rotating blades. The blades are mounted on disks
to the shaft. The gas is expanded to a high, nearly tangential, velocity and
through inclined nozzles and then flows through specially shaped blades, where
the gas energy is converted into tangential forces on each blade. These forces
cause the turbine wheel to rotate (see Refs. I 0-1 and I 0-11 ).
Classification and Description. The majority of turbines have blades at the
periphery of a turbine disk and the gas flow is axial, similarly in concept to the
axial flow pattern shown for pumps in Table I 0-2 and the single-stage turbine
of Fig. 10-1. However, there are a few turbines with radial flow (particularly at
high shaft speeds), such as the one shown in Fig. I 0-2. Ideally there are two
types of axial flow turbines of interest to rocket pump drives: impulse turbines
and reaction turbines, as sketched in Fig. I 0-9. In an impulse turbine the
enthalpy of the working fluid is converted into kinetic energy within the first
set of stationary turbine nozzles and not in the rotating blade elements. High
velocity gases are delivered (in essentially a tangential direction) to the rotating
blades, and blade rotation takes place as a result of the impulse imparted by the
momentum of the fluid stream of high kinetic energy to the rotating blades
which are mounted on the turbine disk. The velocity-staged impulse turbine has
a stationary set of blades which changes the flow direction after the gas leaves
the first set of rototating blades and directs the gas to enter a second set of
rotating blades in which the working fluid gives up further energy to the
turbine wheel. In a pressure-staged impulse turbine, the expansion of the gas
takes place in all the stationary rows of blades. In a reaction turbine the ex
pansion of the gas is roughly evenly split between the rotating and stationary
blade elements. The high pressure drop available for the expansion of the
turbine working fluid in a gas generator cycles favors simple, lightweight
one- or two-stage impulse turbines for high thrust engines. Many rocket tur
bines are neither pure impulse nor reaction turbines, but often are fairly close
to an impulse turbine with a small reaction in the rotating vanes.
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 381
t
Direction
of motion
~
I~
I I
I I
I I
Velocity Velocity
Velocity~
Single-stage, Single-stage, Three-stage
single-row two-row reaction turbine,
impulse turbine velocity compounded -50% reaction
impulse turbine
100
80
~
,;: 60
u> ,
C
·"u'
40
"'
"'
OD
2
"'
"'
C
~ 20
::,
f-
lOL--"-~~-L__JL-.1.L.l._L..1....L.....L....L...L.L...l~~...L.~.1._--1...---1.-1.--1......L.LLL-L...J-1....L
O.Ql 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
lsentropic velocity ratio ulc 0
FIGURE 10-9. Top view diagram, pressure and velocity profiles, and efficiency curves
for impulse and reaction type turbines. The velocity ratio is the pitch line velocity of the
rotating blades u divided by the theoretical gas spouting velocity c derived from the
0
enthalpy drop. Adapted with permission from Refs. 10~1 and 10--12.
With some cycles the turbine exhaust gases pass through a De Laval nozzle
at the exit of the exhaust pipe (see Fig. 1---4). The high turbine outlet pressure
gives critical flow conditions at the venturi throat (particularly at high alti
tudes) and thereby assures a constant turbine outlet pressure and a constant
turbine power which will not vary with altitude. Furthermore, it provides a
small additional thrust to the engine.
382 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
Turbine Performance and Design Considerations. The power supplied by
the turbine is given by a combined version of Eqs. 3-1 and 3-7:
PT= rJTmTf;..h (10--10)
PT= rJTmTcpT1[l - (p2/Pdk-l)/k] (10--11)
The power delivered by the turbine PT is proportional to the turbine effi
ciency rJT, the flow through the turbine mT, and the available enthalpy drop per
unit of flow f;..h. The units in this equation have to be consistent (1 Btu = 778
ft-lbf= 1055 J). This enthalpy is a function of the specific heat cp, the nozzle
inlet temperature T 1, the pressure ratio across the turbine, and the ratio of the
specific heats k of the turbine gases. For gas generator cycles the pressure drop
between the turbine inlet and outlet is relatively high, but the turbine flow is
small (typically 2 to 5% of full propellant flow). For staged combustion cycles
this pressure drop is very much lower, but the turbine flow is much larger.
For very large liquid propellant engines with high chamber pressure the
turbine power can reach over 250,000 hp, and for small engines this could be
perhaps around 35 kW or 50 hp.
According to Eq. 6--12, the power delivered by the turbine PT has to be
equal to the power required by the propellant pumps, the auxiliaries mounted
on the turbopump (such as hydraulic pumps, electric generators, tachometers,
etc.), and power losses in bearings, gears, seals, and wear rings. Usually these
losses are small and can often be neglected. The effect of the turbine gas flow
on the specific impulse of the rocket engine system is discussed in Sections 6.2
and 10.2. For gas generator engine cycles, the rocket designer is interested in
obtaining a high turbine efficiency and a high turbine inlet temperature T in
1
order to reduce the flow of turbine working fluid, and for gas generator cycles
also to raise the overall effective specific impulse, and, therefore, reduce the
propellant mass required for driving the turbine. Three-dimensional computer
analyses of the gas flow behavior and turbine blade geometry have resulted in
efficient blade designs.
Better turbine blade materials (such as single crystals which have been uni
directionally solidified) and specialty alloys can allow turbine inlet tempera
tures between 1400 K (or about 2050°F) and perhaps 1600 K (or 2420°F); these
higher temperatures or higher gas enthalpies reduce the required turbine flow.
Reliability and cost considerations have kept actual turbine inlet temperatures
at conservative values, such as 1150 to 1250°F or about 900 to 950 K, using
lower cost steel alloy as the material. The efficiency of turbines for rocket
turbopumps is shown in Fig. 10-9. Maximum blade speeds with good design
and strong high-temperature materials are typically 400 to 700 m/sec or about
1300 to 2300 ft/sec. Higher blade speeds generally allow an improvement in
efficiency. For the efficiency to be high the turbine blade and nozzle profiles
have to have smooth surfaces. Small clearances at the turbine blade tips are
also needed, to minimize leakage.
10.1. TURBOPUMPS 383
The low efficiency in many rocket turbines is dictated by centrifugal pump
design considerations, which limit the shaft speed for turbopumps in which the
pump and turbine are mounted on a common shaft, as discussed in the next
section. A low shaft speed together with minimum mass requirements, which
prohibit a very large turbine wheel diameter, give a low blade speed, which in
turn reduces the efficiency.
The advantage of increased turbine efficiency (less gas generator propellant
requirement) can be realized only if the turbopump design allows high blade
speeds. This can be achieved in rockets of medium and low thrust by gearing
the turbine to the pumpshaft or by using pumps that permit high shaft speeds;
in rockets of very high thrust the pumps have diameters and shaft speeds close
to those of the turbines and can be mounted on the same shaft as the turbine.
The power input to the turbine can be regulated by controlling the fl.ow to the
turbine inlet. This can be accomplished by throttling or by-passing some of the
flow of the working fluid to the turbine and varying the turbine inlet pressure.
There is no warm-up time available in rocket turbines. The sudden admission
of hot gas at full fl.ow causes severe thermal shock and thermal distortion and
increases the chances for rubbing between moving metal parts. The most severe
stresses of a turbine blade often are thermal stresses; they come during the
engine start when the leading edge is very hot but other parts of the blade are
still cold. This and other loading conditions can be more severe in rocket
turbines than in air-burning gas turbines.
For low-thrust engines the shaft speeds can become very high, such as over
100,000 rpm. Also, the turbine blade height becomes very short and friction
losses can become prohibitive. In order to obtain a reasonable blade height we
go to partial admission turbine designs. Here a portion of the turbine nozzles
are effectively plugged or eliminated.
Gas Generators and Preburners
A gas generator is used as the source of hot gas (from combustion of propel
lants) for driving many of the turbines of turbopumps in a liquid rocket engine.
Depending on the engine cycle, other sources of turbine drive gases are some
times employed, as described in Section 6.3.
Gas generators can be classified as monopropellant, bipropellant, or solid
propellant. Actually the basic design parameters for gas generators are similar
to those for engine thrust chambers or solid rocket motors. The combustion
temperature is usually kept below 1400 to 1600 K (or 2000 to 2400°F) by
intentionally regulating or mixing the propellants in proportions substantially
different from stoichiometric mixture, usually fuel rich. These lower gas tem
peratures allow uncooled chamber construction and prevent melting or limit
the erosion or turbine blades. With monopropellants, such as hydrogen per
oxide (H 20 2) or hydrazine (N 2H 4), the flow is easily controlled and the gases
are generated at predictable temperatures depending on the details of the cat
alyst and the gas generator design. In principle a gas generator looks like an
384 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
uncooled rocket thrust chamber except that the nozzle is replaced by a pipe
leading to the turbine nozzles.
Propellants supplied to the liquid propellant gas generators can come from
separate pressurized tanks or can be tapped off from the engine propellant
pumps. When starting pump-fed gas generators, the turbomachinery needs
to be brought up to operating speed. This can be done by a solid propellant
gas generator starter, an auxiliary pressurized propellant supply, or by letting
the engine "bootstrap" itself into a start using the liquid column head existing
in the vehicle tankage and feed system lines-usually called a "tank-head"
start.
Gas generators have been used for other applications besides supplying
power to rocket feed systems. They have a use wherever there is a need for a
large amount of power for a relatively short time, because they are simpler and
lighter than conventional short-duration power equipment. Typical applica
tions are gas generators for driving torpedo turbines and gas generators for
actuating airplane catapults.
In a staged combustion cycle all of one propellant and a small portion of the
other propellant (either fuel-rich or oxidizer-rich mixture) are burned to create
the turbine drive gases. This combustion device is called a preburner and it is
usually uncooled. It has a much larger flow than the gas generators mentioned
above, its turbines have a much smaller pressure drop, and the maximum
pressure of the propellants is higher.
10.2. PERFORMANCE OF COMPLETE OR MULTIPLE ROCKET
PROPULSION SYSTEMS
The simplified relations that follow give the basic method for determining the
overall specific impulse, the total propellant flow, and the overall mixture ratio
as a function of the corresponding component performance terms for complete
rocket engine systems. This applies to engine systems consisting of one or more
thrust chambers, auxiliaries, gas generators, turbines, and evaporative propel
lant pressurization systems all operating at the same time.
w
Refer to Eqs. 2-5 and 6-1 for the specific impulse Is, propellant flow rate
or m and mixture ratio r. The overall thrust F a is the sum of all the thrusts
0
from thrust chambers and turbine exhausts and the overall flow mis the sum of
their flows. The subscripts oa, o, and/ designate the overall engine system, the
oxidizer, and the fuel, respectively. Then
I:F I:F
Us)oa = '°' · = ~ (l(}-12)
L, w g0 L, m
(10-13)
(l(}-14)
10.2. PERFORMANCE OF COMPLETE OR MULTIPLE ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS 385
These same equations should be used for determining the overall performance
when more than one rocket engine is contained in a vehicle propulsion system
and they are operating simultaneously. They also apply to multiple solid pro
pellant rocket motors and combinations of liquid propellant rocket engines
and solid propellant rocket booster motors, as in the Space Shuttle (see Fig.
1-13).
Example 10-2. For an engine system with a gas generator similar to the one shown in
Fig. 1--4, determine a set of equations that will express (I) the overall engine perfor
mance and (2) the overall mixture ratio of the propellant flows from the tanks. Let the
following subscripts be used: c, thrust chamber; gg, gas generator; and tp, tank pressur
ization. For a nominal burning time t, a I% residual propellant, and a 6% overall
reserve factor, give a formula for the amount of fuel and oxidizer propellant required
with constant propellant flow. Ignore stop and start transients, thrust vector control,
and evaporation losses.
SOLUTION. Only the oxidizer tank is pressurized by vaporized propellant. Although
this pressurizing propellant must be considered in determining the overall mixture ratio,
it should not be considered in determining the overall specific impulse since it stays with
the vehicle and is not exhausted overboard.
(/) ~ Fe+ Fgg (10--15)
s oa (me+ lngg)go
(mo)c + (mo)gg + (mo)tp
r ~----~--~ (10--16)
oa (mf )e + (mf )gg
mf = [(mf )e + (mf )gg] t ( 1.00 + 0.0 I + 0.06)
mo = [(ma)c + (m 0)gg + (111 0)1µ] t ( 1.00+0.01 + 0.06)
For this gas generator cycle the engine mixture ratio or ra is different from the thrust
0
chamber mixture ratio re= (m )c/(mJt· Similarly, the overall engine specific impulse is
0
slightly lower than the thrust chamber specific impulse. However, for an expander cycle
or a staged combustion cycle these two mixture ratios and two specific impulses are the
same, provided that there are no gasified propellant used for tank pressurization.
The overall engine specific impulse is influenced by the nozzle area ratio and
the chamber pressure, and to a lesser extent by the engine cycle, and the
mixture ratio. Table 10-3 describes 11 different rocket engines using liquid
oxygen and liquid hydrogen propellants designed by different companies in
different countries, and shows the sensitivity of the specific impulse to these
parameters. References 10-13 to I 0-15 give additional data on several of these
engmes.
( 0, 0) TABLE 10-3. Comparison of Rocket Engines Using Liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen Propellants
a,
Engine Designation
Engine Cycle, Manuf. Thrust in Specific Chamber Nozzle Engine
or Country (Year Vacuum, Impulse in Pressure, Mixture Area Mass (dry),
Qualified) Vehicle kN (]bf) Vacuum (sec) bar (psia) Ratio Ratio kg
SSME, staged Space 2183 452.5 196 6.0 68.8 3400
combustion, Shuttle (490,850) (2870)
Rocketdyne (1998) (3 required)
RS-68, gas Delta 3313 415 97.2 6.0 21.5 6800
generator, (745,000) (1410)
Rocketdyne (2000)
LE-SA, Expander HII 121.5 452 37.2 5.0 130 255
bleed, MHI, (27,320) (540)
Japan, (1991)
LE-7, staged HII 1080 445.6 122 6.0 52 1720
combustion, MHI, (242,800) (1769)
Japan (1992)
Vulcain, gas Ariane 5 1120 433 112 5.35 45 1585
generator, SEP (251,840) (1624)
and other European Co.'s
HM7, gas generator, SEP Ariane 62.7 444.2 36.2 5.1 45 155
France 1,2,3,4 (14,100) (525)
RL IO-A3, Various 73.4 444.4 32.75 5.0 61 132
Expander, upper (16,500) (475)
Pratt & Whitney ( 1965) stages
RL IO-B2, (1998), 110 466.5 44.12 6.0 375 275
same as above (24,750) (640)
YF 73, Long March 44,147 420 26.28 5.0 40 236
China (10,000) (381)
YF 75 (2 required), 78.45 440 36.7 5.0 80 550
China (17,600) (532)
10.3. PROPELLANT BUDGET 387
10.3. PROPELLANT BUDGET
In all liquid propellant rocket engines some of the propellants are used for
purposes other than producing thrust or increasing the velocity of the vehicle.
This propellant must also be included in the propellant tanks. A propellant
budget can include the eleven items listed below, but very few engines have
allowances for all these items. Table 10--4 shows an example of a budget for a
spacecraft pressure-fed engine system with several small thrusters and one
larger thrust chamber.
I. Enough propellant has to be a available for achieving the required
vehicle velocity increase of the particular application and the particular
flight vehicle or stage. The nominal velocity increment is usually defined
by systems analysis and mission optimization using an iterative calcula
tion based on Eqs. 4--19 or 4--35. If there are alternative flight paths or
missions for the same vehicle, the mission with an unfavorable flight
path and the highest total impulse should be selected. This mission
required propellant is the largest portion of the total propellants loaded
into the vehicle tanks.
2. In a turbopump system using a gas generator cycle, a small portion of
the overall propellant is burned in a separate gas generator. It has a
lower flame temperature than the thrust chamber and operates at a
different mixture ratio; this causes a slight change in the overall mixture
ratio of propellants flowing from the tanks, as shown by Eqs. 10-14 and
10-16.
TABLE 10--4. Example of a Propellant Budget for a Spacecraft Propulsion System
with a Pressurized Monopropellant Feed System
Budget Element Typical Value
1. Main thrust chamber (increasing the 70-90% (d etermined from mission
velocity of stage or vehicle) analysis and system engineering)
2. Flight control function (for reaction 5-15% (determined by control
control thrusters and flight stability) requirements)
3. Residual propellant (trapped in valves, 0.5-2% of total loada
lines, tanks, etc.)
4. Loading uncertainty 0.5% of total loada
5. Allowance for off-nominal performance 0.5-1.0% of total loada
6. Allowance for off-nominal operations 0.25-1.0% of total loada
7. Mission margin (reserve for first two 3-10% of items I and 2
items above)
8. Contingency 2-10% of total loada
Source: Adapted from data supplied by TRW, Inc.
aTotal load is sum of items 1, 2, and 7.
388 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
3. In a rocket propulsion system with a thrust vector control (TVC) system,
such as a swiveling thrust chamber or nozzle, the thrust vector will be
rotated by a few degrees. Thrust vector control systems are described in
Chapter 16. There is a slight decrease in the axial thrust and that reduces
the vehicle velocity increment in item I. The extra propellant needed to
compensate for the small velocity reduction can be determined from the
mission requirements and TVC duty cycle. It could be between 0.1 and
4% of the total propellant.
4. In some engines a small portion of cryogenic propellants is heated,
vaporized, and used to pressurize cryogenic propellant tanks. A heat
exchanger is used to heat liquid oxygen from the pump discharge and
pressurize the oxygen tank, as shown schematically in Fig. 1-4. This
method is used in the hydrogen and oxygen tanks of the Space Shuttle
external tank (see Ref. 6-6).
5. Auxiliary rocket engines that provide for trajectory corrections, station
keeping, maneuvers, or attitude control usually have a series of small
restartable thrusters (see Chapter 4). The propellants for these auxiliary
thrusters have to be included in the propellant budget if they are sup
plied from the same feed system and tanks as the larger rocket engine.
Depending on the mission and the propulsion system concept, this
auxiliary propulsion system can consume a significant portion of the
available propellants.
6. The residual propellant that clings to tank walls or remains trapped in
valves, pipes, injector passages, or cooling passages is unavailable for
producing thrust. It is typically 0.5 to 2% of the total propellant load. It
increases the final vehicle mass at thrust termination and reduces the
final vehicle velocity slightly.
7. A loading uncertainty exists due to variations in tank volume or changes
in propellant density or liquid level in the tank. This is typically 0.25 to
0. 7 5% of the total propellant. It depends, in part, on the accuracy of the
method of measuring the propellant mass during loading (weighing the
vehicle, flow meters, level gages, etc.).
8. The off-nominal rocket performance is due to variations in the manufac
ture of hardware from one engine to another (such as slightly different
pressure losses in a cooling jacket, in injectors and valves, or somewhat
different pump characteristics); these cause slight changes in combus
tion behavior, mixture ratio, or specific impulse. If there are slight
variations in mixture ratio, one of the two liquid propellants will be
consumed fully and an unusable residue will remain in the other pro
pellant's tank. If a minimum total impulse requirement has to be met,
extra propellant has to be tanked to allow for these mixture ratio varia
tions. This can amount up to perhaps 2.0% of one of the propellants.
9. Operational factors can result in additional propellant requirements,
such as filling more propellant than needed into a tank or incorrectly,
10.4. ENGINE DESIGN 389
adjusting regulators or control valves. It can also include the effect of
changes in flight acceleration from the nominal value. For an engine
that has been carefully calibrated and tested, this factor can be small,
usually betwen 0.1 and 1.0%.
10. When using cryogenic propellants an allowance for evaporation and cool
ing down has to be included. It is the mass of extra propellant that is
allowed to evaporate (and be vented overboard while the vehicle is
waiting to be launched) or that is fed through the engine to cool it
down, before the remaining propellant in the tank becomes less than
the minimum needed for the flight mission. Its quantity depends on the
amount of time between topping off (partial refilling) of the tank.
11. Finally, an overall contingency or ignorance factor is needed to allow for
unforeseen propellant needs or inadequate or uncertain estimates of any
of the items above. This can also include allowances for vehicle drag
uncertainties, variations in the guidance and control system, wind, or
leaks.
Only some of the items above provide axial thrust (items 1, 2, and sometimes
also 3 and 5), but all the items need to be considered in determining the total
propellant mass and volume.
10.4. ENGINE DESIGN
The approach, methods, and resources used for rocket engine preliminary
design and final design are usually different for each design organization and
for each major type of engine. They also differ by the degree of novelty.
1. A totally new engine with new major components and some novel design
concepts will result in an optimum engine design for a given application,
but it is usually the most expensive and longest development approach.
One of the major development costs is usually in sufficient testing of
components and several engines (under various environmental and per
formance limit conditions), in order to establish credible reliability data
with enough confidence to allow the initial flights and initial production.
Since the state of the art is relatively mature today, the design and devel
opment of a truly novel engine does not happen very often.
2. New engine using major components or somewhat modified key components
from proven existing engines. This is a common approach today. The
design of such an engine requires working within the capability and limits
of existing or slightly modified components. It requires much less testing
for proving relability.
3. Uprated or improved version of an existing, proven engine. This approach
is quite similar to the second. It is needed when an installed engine for a
given mission requires more payload (which really means higher thrust)
390 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
and/or longer burning duration (more total impulse). Uprating often
means more propellant (larger tanks), higher propellant flows and higher
chamber and feed pressures, and more feed system power. The engine
usually has an increased inert engine mass (thicker walls).
In a simplified way, we describe here a typical process for designing an
engine. At first the basic function and requirements of the new engine must
be established. These engine requirements are derived from the vehicle mission
and vehicle requirements, usually determined by the customer and/or the vehi
cle designers, often in cooperation with one or more engine designers. The
engine requirements can include key parameters such as thrust level, the
desired thrust-time variation, restart or pulsing, altitude flight profile, envir
onmental conditions, engine locations within the vehicle, and limitations or
restraints on cost, engine envelope, test location, or schedule. It also includes
some of the factors listed later in Table 17-5. If an existing proven engine can
be adapted to these requirements, the subsequent design process will be simpler
and quite different than the design of a truly new engine.
Usually some early tentative decisions about the engine are made, such as
the selection of the propellants, their mixture ratio, or the cooling approach for
the hot components. They are based on mission requirements, customer pre
ferences, past experiences, some analysis, and the judgement of the key decision
makers. Some additional selection decisions include the engine cycle, having
one, two, or more thrust chambers fed from the same feed system, redundancy
of auxiliary thrusters, or type of ignition system. Trade-off studies between
several options are appropriate at this time. With a modified existing engine
these parameters are well established, and require few trade-off studies or
analyses. Initial analyses of the pressure balances, power distribution between
pumps and turbines, gas generator flow, propellant flows and reserves, or the
maximum cooling capacity are appropriate. Sketches and preliminary esti
mates of inert mass of key components need to be made, such as tanks, thrust
chambers, turbopumps, feed and pressurization systems, thrust vector control,
or support structure. Alternate arrangements of components (layouts) are
usually examined, often to get the most compact configuration. An initial
evaluation of combustion stability, stress analysis of critical components,
water hammer, engine performance at some off-design conditions, safety fea
tures, testing requirements, cost, and schedule are often performed at this time.
Participation of appropriate experts from the field of manufacturing, field
service, materials, stress analysis, or safety can be critical for selecting the
proper engine and the key design features. A design review is usually conducted
on the selected engine design and the rationale for new or key features.
Test results of subscale or full-scale components, or related or experimental
engines, will have a strong influence on this design process. The key engine
selection decisions need to be validated later in the development process by
testing new components and new engines.
10.4. ENGINE DESIGN 391
The inert mass of the engine and other mass properties ( center of gravity or
moment of inertia) are key parameters of interest to the vehicle designer or
customer. They are needed during preliminary design and again, in more detail,
in the final design. The engine mass is usually determined by summing up the
component or subsystem masses, each of which is either weighed or estimated
by calculating their volumes and knowing or assuming their densities.
Sometimes early estimates are based on known similar parts or subassemblies.
Preliminary engine performance estimates are often based on data from prior
similar engines. If these are not available, then theoretical performance values
can be calculated (see Chapter 2, 3, and 5) for F, I,, k, or 9R, using appropriate
correction factors. Measured static test data are, of course, better than esti
mates. The final performance values are obtained from flight tests or simulated
altitude tests, where airflow and altitude effects can interact with the vehicle or
the plume.
If the preliminary design does not meet the engine requirements, then
changes need to be made to the initial engine decisions and, if that is not
sufficient, sometimes also to the m1ss10n requirements themselves.
Components, pressure balances, and so forth will be reanalyzed and the results
will be a modified version of the engine configuration, its inert mass, and
performance. This process is iterated until the requirements are met and a
suitable engine has been found. The initial design effort culminates in preli
minary layouts of the engine, a preliminary inert mass estimate, an estimated
engine performance, a cost estimate, and a tentative schedule. These prelimin
ary design data form the basis for a written proposal to the customer for
undertaking the final or detail design, development, testing, and for delivering
engines.
Optimization studies are made to select the best engine parameters for meet
ing the requirements; some of them are done before a suitable engine has been
identified, some afterwards. They are described further in Section 10.7. We
optimize parameters such as chamber pressure, nozzle area ratio, thrust, mix
ture ratio, or number of large thrust chambers supplied by the same turbo
pump. The results of optimization studies indicate the best parameter, which
will give a further, usually small, improvement in vehicle performance, propel
lant fraction, engine volume, or cost.
Once the engine proposal has been favorably evaluated by the vehicle
designers, and after the customer has provided authorization and funding to
proceed, then the final design can begin. Some of the analyses, layouts, and
estimates will be repeated, but in more detail, specifications and manufacturing
documents will be written, vendors will be selected, and tooling will be built.
The selection of some of the key parameters (particularly those associated with
some technical risk) will need to be validated. After another design review, key
components and prototype engines are built and ground tested as part of a
planned development effort. If proven reliable, one or two sets of engines will
be installed in a vehicle and operated during flight. In those programs where a
392 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
fair number of vehicles are to be built, the engine will then be produced in the
required quantity.
Table 10-5 shows some of the characteristics of three different Russian
designs staged combustion cycle engine designs, each at a different thrust
and with different propellants (see Ref. 10-17). It shows primary engine para-
TABLE 1~5. Data on Three Russian Large Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines
Using a Staged Combustion Cycle
Engine Designation RD-120 RD-170 RD-253
Application (number of Zenit second Energia launch vehicle Proton vehicle
engines) stage (I) booster (4 ) and booster(!)
Zenit first stage (I)
Oxidizer Liquid oxygen Liquid oxygen N204
Fuel Kerosene Kerosene UDMH
Number and types of One main TP and One main TP and two Single TP
turbopumps (TP) two boost TPs boost TPs
Thrust control, % Yes Yes ±5
Mixture ratio control, % ±10 ±7 ±12
Throttling (full flow is 85 40 None
100%), %
Engine thrust (vacuum), kg 85,000 806,000 167,000
Engine thrust (SL), kg 740,000 150,000
Specific impulse (vacuum), sec 350 337 316
Specific impulse (SL), sec 309 285
Propellant flow, kg/sec 242.9 2393 528
Mixture ratio, 0/F 2.6 2.63 2.67
Length, mm 3872 4000 2720
Diameter, mm 1954 3780 1500
Dry engine mass, kg 1125 9500 1080
Wet engine mass, kg 1285 10500 1260
Thrust Chamber Characteristics
Chamber diameter, mm 320 380 430
Characteristic chamber length, 1274 1079.6 999.7
mm
Chamber area contraction 1.74 1.61 1.54
ratio
Nozzle throat diameter, mm 183.5 235.5 279.7
Nozzle exit diameter, mm 1895 1430 1431
Nozzle area ratio, 106.7 36.9 26.2
Thrust chamber length, mm 2992 2261 2235
Nominal combustion 3670 3676 3010
temperature, K
Rated chamber pressure, 166 250 150
2
kg/cm
2
Nozzle exit pressure, kg/cm 0.13 0.73 0.7
Thrust coefficient, vacuum 1.95 1.86 1.83
Thrust coefficient, SL 1.71 1.65
Gimbal angle, degree Fixed 8 Fixed
Injector type Hot, oxidizer-rich precombustor gas plus fuel
With a staged combustion cycle the thrust, propellant flow, and mixture ratio for the thrust
chamber have the same values as for the entire engine.
10.4. ENGINE DESIGN 393
TABLE 10-5. (Continued)
Engine Designation RD-120 RD-170 RD-253
Turbopump Characteristics
Pumped liquid Oxidizer Fuel Oxidizer Fuel Oxidizer Fuel
Pump discharge pressure, 347 358 614 516 282 251
kg/cm2
Flow rate, kg/sec 173 73 1792 732 384 144
Impeller diameter, mm 216 235 409 405 229 288
Number of stages I I I I+ la I I+ 1°
Pump efficiency, % 66 65 74 74 68 69
Pump shaft power, hp 11,210 6145 175,600 77,760 16,150 8850
Required pump NPSH, m 37 23 260 118 45 38
Shaft speed, rpm 19,230 13,850 13,855
Pump impeller type Radial flow Radial flow Radial flow
Turbine power, hp 17,588 257,360 25,490
Turbine inlet pressure, main 324 519 239
turbine, kg/cm2
Pressure ratio 1.76 1.94 1.42
Turbine inlet temperature, K 735 772 783
Turbine efficiency, % 72 79 74
Number of turbine stages I I I
Preburner Characteristics
Flow rate, kg/sec 177 836 403.5
Mixture ratio, 0/F 53.8 54.3 21.5
Chamber pressure, kg/cm2 325 546 243
Number of preburners I 2 I
°Fuel flow to precombustor goes through a small second-stage pump. (Courtesy of NPO
Energomash, Moscow.)
meters (chamber pressure, thrust, specific impulse, weight, propellant combi
nation, nozzle area ratio, dimensions, etc.) which influence the vehicle perfor
mance and configuration. It also shows secondary parameters, which are
internal to the engine but important in component design and engine optimiza
tion. The Space Shuttle main engine (see Figs. 6--1 and 6--12) has two fuel-rich
preburners, but the Russian engines use oxidizer-rich preburners. Figure 10~10
shows the RD-170 engine with four thrust chambers (and their thrust vector
actuators) supplied by a centrally located single large turbopump (257,000 hp;
not visible in the photo) and one of the two oxidizer-rich pre burners. The flow
diagram of Fig. 10-11 shows this turbopump and the two booster turbopumps;
one is driven by a turbine using a bleed of oxygen-rich gas from the turbine
exhaust (the gas is condensed when it mixes with the liquid oxygen flow) and
the other by a liquid turbine using high-pressure liquid fuel.
Much of today's engine design, preliminary design and design optimization
can be performed on computer programs. These include infinite element ana
lyses, codes for stress and heat transfer, weight and mass properties, stress and
strain analysis of a variety of structures, water hammer, engine performance
analyses, feed system analyses (for balance of flow, pressures, and power), gas
394 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
FIGURE 10-10. The RD-170 rocket engine, shown here on a transfer cart, can be used
as an expendable or reusable engine (up to 10 flights). It has been used on the Zenith,
Soyuz booster, and Energiya launch vehicles. The tubular structure supports the four
hinged thrust chambers and its control actuators. It is the highest thrust liquid rocket
engine in use today. (Courtesy of NPO Energomash, Moscow.)
pressurization, combustion vibrations, and various exhaust plume effects (see
Ref. 10-16). Some customers require that certain analyses (e.g., safety, static
test performance) be delivered to them prior to engine deliveries.
Many computer programs are specific to a particular design organization, a
certain category of application (e.g., interplanetary flight, air-to-air combat,
long-range ballistic missile, or ascent to earth orbit), and many are specific to a
particular engine cycle. One is called engine balance program and it balances the
pressure drops in the fuel, oxidizer, and pressurizing gas flow systems; similar
programs balance the pump and turbine power, speeds, and torques (see
Fuel Oxidizer
inlet To oxygen tank inlet
He pressurization Filter
Oxidizer booster
turbopump
He supply
Fuel booster -
turbopump===========lo===~====l==JL.================"'>-
Valves
Nozzle
Regulator
Command pressure
kick pump Throttles determination module
FIGURE 10-11. Simplified flow diagram of the RD-170 high-pressure rocket engine. The single-shaft large turbopump has a single-stage
reaction turbine, two fuel pumps, and a single-stage oxygen pump with an inducer impeller. All of the oxygen and a small portion of the fuel
flow supply two oxidizer-rich preburners. Only two of the four thrust chambers are shown in this diagram. The two booster pumps prevent
cavitation in the main pumps. The pressurized helium subsystem (only shown partially) supplies various actuators and control valves; it is
indicated by the symbol y. Ignition is accomplished by injecting a hypergolic fuel into the two preburners and the four thrust chambers.
(Courtesy of NPO Energomash, Moscow.)
396 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
Section 10.7), compare different turbopump configurations (see Section 10.1);
some balance programs also calculate approximate masses for engine, tanks,
turbine drive fluids. The program allows iterations of various pressures and
pressure drops, mixture ratios, thrust levels, number of thrust chambers, dis
tribution of total velocity increment between different vehicle stages, trades
between constant thrust (or propellant flow) and decreasing thrust (throttling)
or pulsed (intermittent) thrust.
10.5. ENGINE CONTROLS
All liquid propellant rocket engines have controls to accomplish some or all of
the following tasks:
1. Start rocket operation
2. Shut down rocket operation.
3. Restart, if desired.
4. Maintain programmed operation (predetermined constant or randomly
varied thrust, preset propellant mixture ratio and flow).
5. When safety devices sense an impending malfunction or a critical con
dition of the vehicle or the engine, the control system will automatically
change the engine operating conditions to remedy the defected defect, or
cause a safe emergency engine shutdown. Only some of the likely failure
modes can be remedied by sensing a potential problem and initiating a
remedial action. Some failures occur so rapidly that there is not enough
time to counteract them. Others are too difficult to identify reliably as a
failure and others are not well understood.
6. Fill with propellants.
7. Drain excess propellant after operation.
8. With cryogenic propellants the pipes, pumps, cooling jackets, injectors,
and valves have to be cooled to the cryogenic fluid temperature prior to
start, by bleeding cold propellant through them; this cooling propellant
is not used to produce thrust. Its periodic flow has to be controlled.
9. Check out proper functioning of critical components or a group of
components without actual hot operation before and/or after flight.
10. For recoverable and reusable rocket engines, also provide built-in self
test features to perform continuous checks in flight and on the ground
and recycle the engine to a ready condition within a few minutes after a
launch abort without any ground servicing.
The complexity of these control elements and the complexity of the engine
systems depend very much on the mission of the vehicle. In general, rockets
that are used only once (single-shot devices), that are filled with propellants at
the factory, and that have to operate over a narrow range of environmental
10.5. ENGINE CONTROLS 397
conditions tend to be simpler than rocket systems intended for repeated use, for
applications where satisfactory operation must be demonstrated prior to use,
and for manned vehicles. Because of the nature of the liquid propellants, most
of the control actuation functions are achieved by valves, regulators, pressure
switches, and flow controls. The use of special computers for automatic control
in large engines is now common. The flow control devices, namely the valves,
were discussed in Section 6.9.
Safety controls are intended to protect personnel and equipment in case of
malfunction. For example, the control system is usually so designed that a
failure of the electrical power supply to the rocket causes a nonhazardous
shutdown (all electrical valves automatically returning to their normal posi
tion) and no mixing or explosion of unreacted propellant can occur. Another
example is an electrical interlock device which prevents the opening of the main
propellant valves until the igniter has functioned properly.
Check-out controls permit a simulation of the operation of critical control
components without actual hot operation of the rocket unit. For example,
many rockets have provisions for permitting actuation of the principal valves
without having propellant or pressure in the system.
Control of Engine Starting and Thrust Buildup
In the starting and stopping process of a rocket engine, it is possible for the
mixture ratio to vary considerably from the rated design mixture ratio because
of a lead of one of the propellants and because the hydraulic resistances to
propellant flow are not the same for the fuel and the oxidizer passages. During
this transition period it is possible for the rocket engine to pass through regions
of chamber pressure and mixture ratio which can permit combustion instabil
ity. The starting and stopping of a rocket engine is very critical in timing, valve
sequencing, and transient characteristics. A good control system must be
designed to avoid undesirable transient operation. Close control of the flow
of propellant of the pressure, and of the mixture ratio is necessary to obtain
reliable and repeatable rocket performance. The starting and ignition of thrust
chambers has been discussed in Section 8.4.
Fortunately, most rocket units operate with a nearly constant propellant
consumption and a constant mixture ratio, which simplifies the operating con
trol problem. Stable operation of liquid propellant flows can be accomplished
without automatic control devices because the liquid flow system in general
tends to be inherently stable. This means that the hydraulic system reacts to
any disturbance in the flow of propellant (a sudden flow increase or decrease)
in such a manner as to reduce the effect of the disturbance. The system, there
fore, usually has a natural tendency to control itself. However, in some cases
the natural resonances of the system and its components can have frequency
values that tend to destabilize the system.
The start delay time for a pressure feed system is usually small. Prior to start,
the pressurization system has to be activated and the ullage volume has to be
398 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
pressurized. This start delay is the time to purge the system if needed, open
valves, initiate combustion, and raise the flow and chamber pressure to rated
values. A turbopump system usually requires more time to start. In addition to
the foregoing starting steps for a pressurized system, it has to allow a time
period for starting a gas generator or preburner and for bringing the turbo
pumps up to a speed at which combustion can be sustained and thereafter up to
full flow. If the propellant is nonhypergolic, additional time has to be allowed
for the igniter to function and for feedback to confirm that it is working
properly. All these events need to be controlled. Table I 0-6 describes many
of these steps.
Starting of small thrusters with a pressurized feed system can be very fast, as
short as 3 to 15 millisec, enough time for a small valve to open, the propellant
to flow to the chamber and to ignite, and the small chamber volume to be filled
with high-pressure combustion gas. For turbopump-fed systems and larger
thrust engines, the time from start signal to full chamber pressure is longer,
about 1 to 5 sec, because the pump rotors have inertia, the igniter flame has to
heat a relatively large mass of propellants, the propellant line volumes to be
filled are large, and the number of events or steps that need to take place is
larger.
Large turbopump-fed rocket engines have been started in at least four ways:
1. A solid propellant start grain or start cartridge is used to pressurize the
gas generator or preburner, and this starts turbine operations. This
method is used on Titan III hypergolic propellant rocket engines
(first and second stages) and on the H-1 (nonhypergolic), where the
start grain flame also ignites the liquid propellants in the gas generator.
This is usually the fastest start method, but it does not provide for a
restart.
2. This method, known as tank head start, is used on the SSME, is slower,
does not require a start cartridge, and permits engine restart. The head of
liquid from the vehicle tanks (usually in vertically launched large vehi
cles) plus the tank pressure cause a small initial flow of propellants; then
slowly more pressure is built up as the turbine begins to operate and in a
couple of seconds the engine "bootstraps" its flows and the pressures
then rise to their rated values.
3. A small auxiliary pressurized propellant feed system is used to feed the
initial quantity of fuel and oxidizer (at essentially full pressure) to the
thrust chamber and gas generator. This method was used on the RS-27
engine in the first stage of a Delta II space launch vehicle.
4. The spinner start method uses clean high-pressure gas from a separate
tank to spin the turbine (usually at less than full speed) until the engine
provides enough hot gas to drive the turbine. The high-pressure tank is
heavy, the connections add complexity, and this method is seldom used
today.
10.5. ENGINE CONTROLS 399
TABLE 10-6. Major Steps in the Starting and Stopping of a Typical Large Liquid
Propellant Rocket Engine with a Turbopump Feed System
1. Prior to Start
Check out functioning of certain components (without propellant flow), such as the thrust
vector control or some valve actuators.
Fill tanks with propellants.
Bleed liquid propellants to eliminate pockets of air or gas.
When using propellants that can react with air (e.g., hydrogen can freeze air, small solid air
crystals can plug injection holes, and solid air with liquid hydrogen can form an explosive
mixture), it is necessary to purge the piping system (including injector, valves and cooling
jacket) with an inert, dry gas (e.g., helium) to remove air and moisture. In many cases several
successive purges are undertaken.
With cryogenic propellants the piping system needs to be cooled to cryogenic temperatures to
prevent vapor pockets. This is done by repeated bleeding of cold propellant through the
engine system (valves, pumps, pipes, injectors, etc.) just prior to start. The vented cold gas
condenses moisture droplets in the air and this looks like heavy billowing clouds escaping
from the engine.
Refill or "top off" tank to replace cryogenic propellant that has evaporated or been used for
cooling the engine.
Pressurize vehicle's propellant tanks just before start.
2. Start: Preliminary Operation
Provide start electric signal, usually from vehicle control unit or test operator.
With nonhypergolic propellants, start the ignition systems in gas generator or preburner and
main chambers; for nonhypergolic propellants a signal has to be received that the igniter is
burning before propellants are allowed to flow into the chambers.
Initial operation: opening of valves (in some cases only partial opening or a bypass) to admit
fuel and oxidizer at low initial flows to the high pressure piping, cooling jacket, injector
manifold, and combustion chamber(s). Valve opening rate and sequencing may be critical to
achieve proper propellant lead. Propellants start to burn and turbine shaft begins to rotate.
Using an automated engine control, make checks (e.g., shaft speed, igniter function, feed
pressures) to assure proper operation before initiating next step.
In systems with gearboxes the gear lubricant and coolant fluid start to flow.
For safety reasons, one of the propellants must reach the chamber first.
3. Start: Transition to Full Flow/Full Thrust
Turbopump power and shaft speed increase.
Propellant flows and thrust levels increase until they reach full-rated values. May use controls to
prevent exceeding limits of mixture ratio or rates of increase during transient.
Principal valves are fully opened. Attain full chamber pressure and thrust.
In systems where vaporized propellant is fed into the propellant tanks for tank pressurization,
the flow of this heated propellant is initiated.
Systems for controlling thrust or mixture ratio or other parameter are activated.
4. Stop
Signal to stop deactivates the critlcal valve(s).
Key valves close in a predetermined sequence. For example, the valve controlling the gas
generator or preburner will be closed first. Pressurization of propellant tanks is stopped.
As soon as turbine drive gas supply diminishes the pumps will slow down. Pressure and flow of
each propellant will diminish quickly until it stops. The main valves are closed, often by
spring forces, as the fluid pressures diminish. Tank pressurization may also be stopped. In
some engines the propellant trapped in the lines or cooling jacket may be blown out by
vaporization or gas purge.
400 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
SSME Start and Stop Sequences. This is an example of the transient start
and stop behavior of a complex staged combustion cycle engine with a tank
head start. It illustrates the rapid functions of an electronic controller. The
SSME flow sheet in Fig. 6-12 identifies the location of the key components
mentioned below and Fig. 10-12 shows the sequence and events of these
transients. The remainder of this subsection is based on information provided
by The Boeing Company, Rockerdyne Propulsion and Power.
For a tank head start, initial energy to start the turbines spinning is all
derived from initial propellant tank pressures (fuel and oxidizer) and gravity
(head of liquid column). Combining the tank head start with a staged combus
tion cycle consisting of five pumps, two preburners, and a main combustion
chamber (MCC) results in a complicated and sophisticated start sequence,
which is very robust and reliable. Prior to test, the SSME turbopumps and
ducting (down to the main propellant valves) are chilled with liquid hydrogen
and liquid oxygen (LOX) to cryogenic temperature to ensure liquid propellants
for proper pump operation. At engine start command, the main fuel valve
(MFY) is opened first to provide chilling below the MFY and a fuel lead to
the engine. The three oxidizer valves sequence the main events during the
crucial first two seconds of start. The fuel preburner oxidizer valve (FPOY)
is ramped to 56% to provide LOX for ignition in the fuel preburner (FPB) in
order to provide initial turbine torque of the high-pressure fuel turbopump
(HPFTP). Fuel system oscillations (FSO), which occur due to heat transfer
downstream of the initially chilled system can result in flowrate dips. These fuel
flow dips can lead to damaging temperature spikes in the FPB as well as the
oxidizer preburner (OFB) at ignition and 2 Hz cycles thereafter until the
hydrogen is above critical pressure. The oxidizer preburner oxidizer valve
(OPOY) and main oxidizer valve (MOY) are ramped open next to provide
LOX for OPB and MCC ignition.
The next key event is FPB prime. Priming is filling of the OX system
upstream of the injectors with liquid propellant. This results in increased com
bustion and higher power. This event occurs around 1.4 sec into start. The
high-pressure fuel turbopump (HPFTP) speed is automatically checked at 1.24
sec into start to ensure it will be at a high enough level before the next key
event, MCC prime, which is controlled by the MOY. Priming and valve timing
are critical. We explain some of the events that could go wrong. At MCC
prime, an abrupt rise in backpressure on the fuel pump/turbine occurs. If
flowrate through the fuel pump at this time is not high enough (high speed),
then the heat imparted to the fluid as it is being pumped can vaporize it, leading
to unsatisfactory flow in the engine, and subsequent high mixture ratio with
high gas temperature and possible burnout in the hot gas system. This occurs if
the MCC primes too early or HPFTP speed is abnormally low. If the MCC
primes too late, the HPFTP may accelerate too fast due to low backpressure
after FPB prime and exceed its safe speed. The MCC prime normally occurs at
1.5 sec. The OPB is primed last since it controls LOX flow and a strong fuel
lead and healthy fuel pump flow are desirable to prevent engine burnout due to
10.5. ENGINE CONTROLS 401
100
90
80
70
"E
(I)
!:
60
(aI).
~ 50
:J
Cl)
Cl)
e? 40
a.
Q)
.0 30
E
.<c1l
20
(.)
"C
(I)
.!::l 10
<ii I·
E I
I
0 C : 00 2 3 4 5 6 7
"C
C: Time from engine start, sec
<1l
"ci
(I)
~ 100
C al) . · MOV \ , MFV
E 90 \
a:J. \
\
"C 80 \ \
(I) ·. ' CCV
.!::l
<ii I • .• ----~----------- I
E 70
____________________ ,
0 \
C:
60
C: \\
;0 ; ,... .....
"cii 50
><(0 >a I
i
) i. 40 '-....:.._/· . I I \ ,sH 'p P e
'
F eT dP \ '\ ·
'
30
'
'
20 .....
--
10
00
2 3 4 5 6 7
Time from engine shutdown, sec
FIGURE 10-12. The sequence and events for starting and shutdown of the SSME
(Space Shuttle main engine). This particular start sequence leads to a chamber pressure
of 2760 psia (normalized here to 100%), a high-pressure fuel turbopump speed of 33,160
rpm (100%) , at a sea-level thrust of 380,000 !bf (shown as 100%). This shutdown
occurs at altitude when the engine has been throttled to 67% of its power level or a
vacuum thrust of 312,559 !bf, which is shown as 67% of the MCC chamber pressure.
(Courtesy of The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power.)
402 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
a high mixture ratio. The OPOV provides minimal flowrate during the early
part of the start to force the oxidizer to prime last at 1.6 sec into start. Again,
the FSO influences temperature spikes in the OPB and must be sequenced
around, prior to the MCC prime which raises the fuel pressure above critical
in the fuel system. At two seconds into start, the propellant valves are
sequenced to provide 25% of rated power level (RPL). During the first 2.4
sec of start, the engine is in an open-loop mode, but proportional control of the
OPOV is used, based on MCC pressure. At this point, additional checks are
carried out to ensure engine health, and a subsequent ramp to mainstage at 2.4
sec is done using closed-loop MCC-chamber-pressure/OPOV control. At 3.6
sec, closed-loop mixture ratio/FPOV control is activated.
The chamber cooling valve (CCV) is open at engine start and sequenced to
provide optimum coolant fuel flow to the nozzle cooling jacket and the cham
ber and preburners during the ignition and main stage operation. It diverts
flow to the cooling passages in the nozzle after MCC prime causes the heat load
to increase. The description above is simplified and does not mention several
other automatic checks, such as verifying ignition in the MCC or FPB or the
fuel or chamber pressure buildup, which are sensed and acted upon at various
times during the start sequence. The spark-activated igniters are built into the
three injectors (MCC, FPB, OPB) using the same propellants. They are not
mentioned above or shown in the flow sheet, but one of them can be seen in
Fig. 9-6.
The shutdown sequence is initiated by closing the OPOV, which powers
down the engine (reduces oxygen flow, chamber pressure, and thrust); this is
followed quickly by closing the FPOV, so the burning will shut down fuel rich.
Shortly thereafter the MOV is closed. The MFV stays open for a brief time and
then is moved into an intermediate level to balance with the oxygen flow (from
trapped oxygen downstream of the valves). The MPV and the CCV are closed
after the main oxygen mass has been evaporated or expelled.
Automatic Controls
Automatically monitored controls are frequently used in liquid propellant rock
ets to accomplish thrust control or mixture ratio control. The automatic con
trol of the thrust vector is discussed in Chapter 16.
Before electronic controls became common for large engines, pneumatic
controls were used with helium gas. We still use helium to actuate large valves,
but no longer for logic control. A pressure ladder sequence control was used,
where pressures (and a few other quantities) were sensed and, if satisfactory,
the next step of the start sequence was pneumatically initiated. This was used
on the H-1 engine and the Russian RD-170 engine, whose flow sheet is shown
in Figure 10-11.
Most automatic controls use a servomechanism. They generally consist of
three basic elements: a sensing mechanism, which measures or senses the vari
able quantity to be controlled; a computing or controlling mechanism, which
10.5. ENGINE CONTROLS 403
compares the output of the sensing mechanism with a reference value and gives
a control signal to the third component, the actuating device, which manipu
lates the variable to be controlled. Additional discussion of computer control
with automatic data recording and analysis is given in Chapter 20.
Figure 10-13 shows a typical simple thrust control system for a gas gen
erator cycle aimed at regulating the chamber pressure (and therefore also the
thrust) during the flight to a predetermined value. A pressure-measuring device
with an electric output is used for the sensing element, and an automatic
control device compares this gauge output signal with a signal from the refer
ence gauge or a computer voltage and thus computes an error signal. This error
signal is amplified, modulated, and fed to the actuator of the throttle valve. By
controlling the propellant flow to the gas generator, the generator pressure is
regulated and, therefore, also the pump speed and the main propellant flow;
indirectly, the chamber pressure in the thrust chamber is regulated and, there
fore, also the thrust. These quantities are varied until such time as the error
signal approaches zero. This system is vastly simplified here, for the sake of
Fuel Oxidizer
Actuated dual throttle valve
in gas generator feed lines
Thrust
chamber
Reference pressure strain gage
(measures a desired
regulated gas pressure)
FIGURE 10-13. Simplified schematic diagram of an automatic servomechanism-type
chamber pressure control of a liquid propellant rocket engine with a turbopump feed
system, a gas generator, and a tank head, boot strap (self-pumping) starting system.
404 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
illustration; in actual practice the system may have to be integrated with other
automatic controls. In this diagram the mixture of the gas generator is con
trolled by the pin tie shapes of the fuel and oxidizer valves of the gas generator
and by yoking these two valves together and having them moved in unison by a
single actuator.
In the expander cycle shown schematically in Fig. 6-11, the thrust is regu
lated by maintaining a desired chamber pressure and controlling the amount of
hydrogen gas flowing to the turbine by means of a variable bypass. The flow
through this bypass is small (typically 5% of gas flow) and is controlled by the
movement of a control valve.
In a propellant utilization system the mixture ratio is varied to insure that
the fuel and oxidizer propellant tanks are both simultaneously and comple
tely emptied; no undue propellant residue should remain to increase the
empty mass of the vehicle, which in turn would detrimentally decrease the
vehicle mass ratio and the vehicle's flight performance (see Chapter 4). For
example, the oxidizer flow rate may be somewhat larger than normal due to
its being slightly denser than normal or due to a lower than normal injector
pressure drop; if uncontrolled, a fuel residue would remain at the time of
oxidizer exhaustion; however, the control system would cause the engine to
operate for a period at a propellant mixture ratio slightly more fuel-rich than
normal, to compensate and assure almost simultaneous emptying of both
propellant tanks. Such a control system requires accurate measurement of
the amount of propellant remaining in the two propellant tanks during the
flight.
Any of the three principal components of an automatic control system can
have many differerent forms. Typical sensing devices include those that mea
sure chamber pressure, propellant pressures, pump rotational speeds, tank
level, or propellant flow. The actuating device can throttle propellant flow or
control a bypass device or the gas generator discharge. There are many oper
ating mechanisms for the controller, such as direct electrical devices, electronic
analog or digital computers, hydraulic or pneumatic devices, and mechanical
devices. The actuators can be driven by electrical motors, hydraulic, pneu
matic, or mechanical power. The hydraulic actuators can provide very high
forces and quick response. The exact type of component, the nature of the
power supply, the control logic, the system type, and the operating mechanisms
for the specific control depend on the details of the application and the require
ments. Controls are discussed further in Refs. 6-1 and 10-18.
In applications where the final vehicle velocity must be accurately deter
mined, the amount of impulse that is imparted to the vehicle during the cutoff
transient may be sufficiently variable to exceed the desired velocity tolerance.
Therefore, in these applications close control over the thrust decay curve is
necessary and this can be accomplished by automatic control over the sequen
cing and closing rates of the main propellant valves and the location of the
valves in relation to the injector.
10.6. ENGINE SYSTEM CALIBRATION 405
Control by Computer
Early rocket engines used simple timers and, later, a pressure ladder sequence
to send commands to the engine for actuating valves and other steps in the
operation. Pneumatic controllers were also used in some engines for starting
and stopping. For the last 20 years we have used digital computers in large
liquid propellant rocket engines for controlling their operation (see Ref. 10-
15). In addition to controlling the start and stop of engines, they can do a lot
more and can contribute to making the engine more reliable. Table 10-7 gives a
list of typical functions that a modern engine control computer has undertaken
in one or more engines. This list covers primarily large turbopump-fed engines
and does not include consideration of multiple small thruster attitude control
rocket engines.
The design of control computers is beyond this text. In general it has to
consider carefully all the possible engine requirements, all the functions that
have to be monitored, all the likely potential failure modes and their com
pensating or ameliorating steps, all the sensed parameters and their scales, the
method of control, such as open, closed, or multiple loops, adaptive or self
learning (expert system), the system architecture, the software approach, the
interrelation and division of tasks with other computers on board the vehicle
or on the ground, and the method of validating the events and operations. It
is also convenient to have software that will allow some changes (which
become necessary because of engine developments or failures) and allow
the control of several parameters simultaneously. While the number of func
tions performed by the control computer seems to have increased in the last
20 years, the size and mass of the control computer has actually decreased
substantially.
The control computer is usually packaged in a waterproof, shockproof
black box, which is mounted on the engine. Fire-resistant and waterproof
cable harnesses lead from this box to all the instrument sensors, valve position
indicators, tachometers, accelerometers, actuators, and other engine compo
nents, to the power supply, the vehicle's controller, and an umbilical, severable
multi-wire harness leads to the ground support equipment.
10.6. ENGINE SYSTEM CALIBRATION
Although an engine has been designed to deliver a specific performance
m,
(F, 1 r), a newly manufactured engine will not usually perform precisely
5,
at these nominal parameters. If the deviation from the nominal performance
values is more than a few percent, the vehicle will probably not complete its
intended flight course. There are several reasons for these deviations. Because
of unavoidable dimensional tolerances on the hardware, the flow-pressure
profile or the injector impingement (combustion efficiency) will deviate
slightly from the nominal design value. Even a small change in mixture
406 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
TABLE 10-7. Typical Functions to Be Performed by Digital Computers in
Monitoring and Controlling the Operation of a Liquid Propellant Rocket Engine
I. Sample the signals from significant sensors (e.g., chamber pressure, gas and hardware
temperatures, tank pressure, valve position, etc.) at frequent intervals, say once, 10, 100, or 1000
times per second. For parameters that change slowly, e.g., the temperature of the control box,
sampling every second or every five seconds may be adequate, but chamber pressure would be
sampled at a high frequency.
2. Keep a record of al/ the significant signals received and all the signals generated by the
computer and sent out as commands or information.
3. Control the steps and sequence of the engine start. Figure 10-12 and Table 10-6 list typical
steps that have to be taken, but do not list the measured parameters that will confirm that the
commanded step was implemented. For example, if the igniter is activated, a signal change from
a properly located temperature sensor or a radiation sensor could verify that the ignition had
indeed happened.
4. Control the shutdown of the engine. For each of the steps listed at the bottom of Table 10-6
or in Fig. 10--12 there often has to be a sensing of a pressure change or other parameter change
to verify that the commanded shutdown step was taken. An emergency shutdown may be
commanded by the controller, when it senses certain kinds of malfunctions, that allow the
engine to be shut down safely before a dramatic failure occurs. This emergency shutdown
procedure must be done quickly and safely and may be different from a normal shutdown, and
must avoid creating a new hazardous condition.
5. Limit the duration of full thrust operation. For example, cutoff is to be initiated just before the
vehicle attains the desired mission flight velocity.
6. Safety monitoring and control. Detect combustion instability, over-temperatures in
precombustors, gas generators, or turbopump bearings, violent turbopump vibration,
turbopump overspeed or other parameter known to cause rapid and drastic component
malfunction, that can quickly lead to engine failure. Usually, more than one sensor signal will
show such a malfunction. If detected by several sensors, the computer may identify it as a
possible failure whose in-flight remedy is well known (and preprogramm~d into the computer);
then a corrective action or a safe shutdown may be automatically commanded by the control
computer.
7. Control propellant tank pressurization. The tank pressure value has to be within an allowable
range during engine operation and also during a coasting flight period prior to a restart. Sensing
the activation of relief valves on the tank confirms overpressure. Automatically, the computer
can then command stopping or reducing the flow of pressurant.
8. Pe,form automatic closed-loop control of thrust and propellant utili:::ation (described before).
9. Transmit signals to a flying vehicle's telemetering system, which in turn can send them to a
ground station, thus providing information on the engine status, particularly during
experimental or initial flights.
10. Self-test the computer and software.
11. Analyze key sensor signals for deviation from nominal performance before, during, and after
engine operation. Determine whether sensed quantities are outside of predicted limits. If
appropriate and feasible, if more than one sensor indicates a possible out-of-limit value, and if
the cause and remedy can be predicted (preprogrammed), then the computer can automatically
initiate a compensating action.
10.6. ENGINE SYSTEM CALIBRATION 407
ratio will cause a significant increase of residual, unused propellant. Also,
minor changes in propellant composition or storage temperature (which
affects density and viscosity) can cause deviations. Regulator setting toler
ances or changes in flight acceleration (which affects static head) are other
factors. An engine calibration is the process of adjusting some of its internal
parameters so that it will deliver the intended performance within the allowed
tolerance bands.
Hydraulic and pneumatic components (valves, pipes, expansion joints) can
readily be water flow tested on flow benches and corrected for pressure drops
and density (and sometimes also viscosity) to determine their pressure drop at
rated flow. Components that operate at elevated temperatures (thrust cham
bers, turbines, preburners, etc.) have to be hot fired and cryogenic components
(pumps, some valves) often have to be tested at the cryogenic propellant tem
perature. The engine characteristics can be estimated by adding together the
corrected values of pressure drops at the desired mass flow. Furthermore, the
ratio of the rated flows m/riy has to equal the desired mixture ratio r. This is
0
shown in the example below. The adjustments include adding pressure drops
with judiciously placed orifices, or changing valve positions or regulator
setting.
In most pressurized feed systems the pressurizing gas is supplied from its
high pressure tank through a regulator to pressurize both the fuel and the
oxidizer in their respective tanks. The pressure drop equations for the oxidizer
and the fuel (subscripts o and/) are given below for a pressurized feed system
at nominal flows.
(1~17)
(1~18)
The gas pressure in the propellant tank is the regulated pressure Pgas, dimin
ished by the pressure losses in the gasline 6.Pgas· The static head of the liquid
Lap (Lis the distance of the liquid level above the thrust chamber, a is the flight
acceleration, and p is the propellant density) augments the gas pressure. It has
to equal the chamber pressure p plus all the pressure drops in the liquid piping
1
or valves 6.p, the injector 6.Pinj, the cooling jacket 6.pj, and the dynamic flow
head ! pv2 . If the required liquid pressures do not equal the gas pressure in the
propellant tank at the nominal propellant flow, then an additional pressure
drop (calibration orifice) has to be inserted. A good design provides an extra
pressure drop margin for this purpose.
Two methods are available for precise control of the engine performance
parameters. One uses an automatic system with feedback and a digital com
puter to control the deviations in real time, while the other relies on an initial
static calibration of the engine system. The latter appoach is simpler and is
sometimes preferred, and is still quite accurate.
408 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
The pressure balance is the process of balancing the available pressure sup
plied to the engine (by pumps and/or pressurized tanks) against the pressure
drops plus the chamber pressure. It is necessary to do this balancing in order to
calibrate the engine, so it will operate at the desired flows and mixture ratio.
Figure 10-14 shows the pressure balance for one of the two branches of pro
pellant systems in a bipropellant engine with a pressurized feed system. It plots
the pressure drops (for injector, cooling passages, pressurizing gas passages,
valves, propellant feed lines, etc.) and the chamber pressure against the pro
pellant flow, using actual component pressure drop measurements (or esti
mated data) and correcting them for different flows. The curves are generally
plotted in terms of head loss and volumetric flow to eliminate the fluid density
as an explicit variable for a particular regulated pressure. The regulated pres
sure is the same for the fuel and oxidizer pressure balance and it also can be
adjusted. This balance of head and flow must be made for both the fuel and
oxidizer systems, because the ratio of their flows establishes the actual mixture
ratio and the sum of their flows establishes the thrust. The pressure balance
between available and required tank pressure, both at the desired flow, is
achieved by adding a calibration orifice into one of the lines, as can be seen
in Fig. 10-14. Not shown in the figure is the static head provided by the
elevation of the liquid level, since it is small for many space launch systems.
However, with high acceleration and dense propellants, it can be a significant
addition to the available head.
For a pumped feed system of a bi propellant engine, Fig. I 0-15 shows a
balance diagram for one branch of the two propellants systems. The pump
speed is an additional variable. The calibration procedure is usually more
complex for a turbopump system, because the pump calibration curves
(flow-head-power relation) can not readily be estimated without good test
data and cannot easily be approximated by simple analytical relations. The
flow of the propellants to a gas generator or preburner also needs to be cali
brated. In this case the turbine shaft torque has to equal the torque required by
the pumps and the energy losses in bearings, seals or windage. Thus a power
balance must be achieved in addition to the matching of pressures and the
individual propellant flows. Since these parameters are interdependent, the
determination of the calibration adjustments may not always be simple.
Many rocket organizations have developed computer programs to carry out
this balancing.
Example 10-3. The following component data and design requirements are given for a
pressurized liquid propellant rocket system similar to that in Figs. 1-3 and 10-14: fuel,
75% ethyl alcohol; oxidizer, liquid oxygen; desired mixture ratio, 1.30; desired thrust,
5000 !bf at sea level. For this propellant combustion gas k = 1.22.
Component test data: Pressure losses in gas systems were found to be negligible. Fuel
valve and line losses were 9.15 psi at a flow of 9.63 lbm/sec of water. Oxidizer valve and
line losses were 14.2 psi at a flow of 12.8 lbm/sec of liquid oxygen. Fuel cooling jacket
prssure loss was 52 psi at a flow of 9.61 lbm/sec of water. Oxidizer side injector pressure
10.6. ENGINE SYSTEM CALIBRATION 409
Regulated pressure diminished
=
by losses in gas line
available tank pressure
Orifice
Ideal regulated pressure
Injection
pressure
} drop
Propellant
Hydraulic tank
:Q :iI
}
losses in
< <f f> > valves, lines
(11
a.
0
"O
"'
QI
I
pressure
FIGURE 10-14. Simplified flow diagram and balance curves for the fuel or the oxidizer
of a typical gas-pressurized bipropellant feed system. This diagram is also the same for a
monopropellant feed system, except that it has no calibration orifice; it is calibrated by
setting the proper regulated pressure.
Available pump pressure
(characteristic pump curves)
RatedH
Valve and
'line losses
Injection
l....::l~~~~c:J::tt:rlitIJE!H::l±±±tt::tIITL
drop
Rated Q
Pump capacity or flow
FIGURE 10-15. Simplified diagram of the balance of available and required feed pres
sures versus flow for one of the propellants in a rocket engine with a turbopump feed
system. Chamber pressure is increased by liquid column.
410 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
drop was 90.0 psi at 10.2 lb/sec of oxygen flow under thrust chamber operating condi
tions. Fuel side injector pressure drop was 48.3 psi at 10.2 lb/sec of fuel flow under
thrust chamber operating conditions. Average results of several sea-level thrust chamber
tests were: thrust= 5410 !bf; mixture ratio= 1.29; specific impulse= 222 sec; chamber
pressure = 328 psia; nozzle area ratio = 4.0. Determine regulator setting and size and
location of calibration orifices.
SOLUTION. First, the corrections necessary to obtain the desired thrust chamber
conditions have to be determined. The experimental thrust chamber data must be
adjusted for deviations in mixture ratio, thrust, and specific impulse. The variation of
specific impulse with mixture ratio is determined from experimental data or (on a
relative basis) from theoretical calculations similar to those that are the basis of Fig.
5-1. Because the value of ls at the desired mixture ratio of 1.30 is within 0.08% of the
value of ls under the actual test conditions (r = 1.29), any mixture ratio correction of I,
is neglected here.
The correction of the specific impulse for chamber pressure is made next. The
specific impulse is essentially proportional to the thrust coefficients as determined
from Eq. 3-30. For k = 1.22, and the pressure ratios p /p = 328/14.7 = 22.2 and
1 3
300/14.7= 20.4, the values of CF can be calculated as 1.420 and 1.405, respectively.
In this calculation p has to be determined for isentropic conditions, such as those in
2
Figs. 3-7 or 3-8 for the given nozzle area ratio. The sea-level specific impulse is
therefore corrected to Is = 222 (1.405/1.420)= 220 sec. The chamber pressure has to
be reduced from 328 psi to a lower value in order to bring the thrust from its test
value of 5410 !bf to the design value of 5000 !bf. In accordance with Eq. 3-31,
F = CFA 1p1• The chamber pressure is inversely proportional to the thrust coefficient
CF and proportional to the thrust, and therefore
The primes refer to the component test condition.
PI = 328(5000/5410)(1.420/l.405) = 306 psi
The desired total propellant flow is, from Eq. 2-5,
w
= F / [ = 5000/220 = 22. 7 !bf/sec
5
For a mixture ratio of 1.3, the desired fuel and oxidizer flows are obtained from Eqs. 6-3
and 6-4 as wf = 9.9 lbf/sec and w = 12.8 lbf/sec. Next, the various component pressure
0
drops are corrected to the desired flow values and to the corrected propellant densities in
accordance with Eq. 8-2, which applies to all hydraulic devices. By neglecting variations
in discharge coefficients, this equation can be rewritten into a convenient form:
With this equation and the specific gravity values (from Fig. 7-1) of 1.14 for oxygen,
0.85 for diluted ethyl alcohol, and 1.0 for water, the new pressure drops for the corrected
flow conditions can be found, and these are tabulated below with flow values given in
pounds per second and pressure values in pounds per square inch.
10.7. SYSTEM INTEGRATION AND ENGINE OPTIMIZATION 411
Component Test Data Design Conditions
Component Fluid w t,,.p Fluid w t,,.p
Fuel injector Fuel 10.2 48.3 Fuel 9.9 45.3
Oxidizer injector Oxygen 14.0 90.0 Oxygen 12.8 75.0
Fuel cooling jacket Water 9.61 52.0 Fuel 9.9 64.9
Fuel valve and line Water 9.63 9.15 Fuel 9.9 11.4
Oxidizer valve and line Oxygen 12.8 14.2 Oxygen 12.8 14.2
The total pressure drop in the fuel system is 45.3 + 64.9 + 11.4 = 121.6 psi, and in the
oxidizer system it is 75.0 + 14.2 = 89.2 psi.
The tank pressures required to obtain the desired flows are calculated by adding the
chamber pressure to these pressure drops; that is, (p) = 306 + 89.2 = 395.2 psi and
(p)1 = 306 + 121.6 = 427.6 psi. To equalize the tank 0 p ressures so that a single gas
pressure regulator can be used, an additional pressure loss must be introduced into the
oxygen system. The correction to this simple pressurized liquid propellant system is
accomplished by means of an orifice, which must be placed in the propellant piping
between the oxidizer tank and the thrust chamber. Allowing IO psi for regulator func
tioning, the pressure drop in a calibration orifice will be t,,.p = 427.6 - 395.2 + 10 = 42.4
psi. The regulator setting should be adjusted to give a regulated downstream pressure of
427.6 psi under flow conditions. The orifice area (assume Cd= 0.60 for a sharp-edged
orifice) can be obtained from Eq. 8-2, but corrected with a g for English units.
0
In 12.8 X 144
A = Cd.j2gp t,,.p = .-:60--:---.j'2=x==:3=2=.2=x=1.=14=x=6==2=.4=x=4=2=.4=x=1==44
--=---o
= 0.581 in.2 (or 0.738 in. diameter)
A set of balancing equations can be assembled into a computer program to
assist in the calibration of engines. It can also include some of the system's
dynamic analogies that enable proper calibration and adjustment of transient
performance of the engine as during start. There is a trend to require tighter
tolerances on rocket engine parameters (such as thrust, mixture ratio, or spe
cific impulse), and therefore the measurements, calibrations, and adjustments
are also being performed to much tighter tolerances than was customary 25
years ago.
10.7. SYSTEM INTEGRATION AND ENGINE OPTIMIZATION
Rocket engines are part of a vehicle and must interact and be integrated with
other vehicle subsystems. There are interfaces (connections, wires, or pipelines)
between the engine and the vehicle's structure, electric power system, flight
control system (commands for start or thrust vector control), and ground
support system (check-out or propellant supply). The engine also imposes
limitations on vehicle components by its heat emissions, noise, and vibrations.
412 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
Integration means that the engine and the vehicle are compatible with each
other, interfaces are properly designed, and there is no interference or unne
cessary duplication of functions with other subsystems. The engine works with
other subsystems to enhance the vehicle's performance and reliability, and
reduce the cost. In Chapter 17 we describe the process of selecting rocket
propulsion systems and it includes a discussion of interfaces and vehicle inte
gration. This discussion in Chapter 17 is supplementary and applies to several
different rocket propulsion systems. This section concerns liquid propellant
rocket engines.
Since the propulsion system is usually the major mass of the vehicle, its
structure (which usually includes the tanks) often becomes a key structural
element of the vehicle and has to withstand not only the thrust force but
also various vehicle loads, such as aerodynamic forces or vibrations. Several
alternate tank geometries and locations (fuel, oxidizer, and pressurizing gas
tanks), different tank pressures, and different structural connections have to be
evaluated to determine the best arrangement.
The thermal behavior of the vehicle is strongly affected by the heat genera
tion (hot plume, hot engine components, or aerodynamic heating) and the heat
absorption (the liquid propellants are usually heat sinks) and by heat rejection
to its surroundings. Many vehicle components must operate within narrow
temperature limits, and their thermal designs can be critical when evaluated
in terms of the heat balance during, after, and before the rocket engine opera
tion.
Optimization studies are conducted to select the best values or to optimize
various engine parameters such as chamber pressure (or thrust), mixture ratio
(which affects average propellant density and specific impulse), number of
thrust chambers, nozzle area ratio, or engine volume. By changing one or
more of these parameters, it is usually possible to make some improvement
to the vehicle performance (0.1 to 5.0%), its reliability, or to reduce costs.
Depending on the mission or application, the studies are aimed at maximizing
one or more vehicle parameter such as range, vehicle velocity increment, pay
load, circular orbit altitude, propellant mass fraction, or minimizing costs. For
example, the mixture ratio of hydrogen-oxygen engines for maximum specific
impulse is about 3.6, but most engines operate at mixture ratios between 5 and
6 because the total propellant volume is less, and this allows a reduced mass for
the propellant tanks and the turbopump (resulting in a higher vehicle velocity
increment) and a reduced vehicle drag (more net thrust). The selection of the
best nozzle area ratio was mentioned in Chapter 3; it depends on the flight
path's altitude-time history; the increase in specific impulse is offset by the
extra nozzle weight and length. The best thrust-time profile can also usually be
optimized, for a given application, by using trajectory analyses.
SYMBOLS 413
PROBLEMS
1. Estimate the mass and volume of nitrogen required to pressurize an N20cMMH
feed system for a 4500 N thrust chamber of 25 sec duration (I;,, = 0.92, the ideal, / =
2 5
285 sec at 1000 psi or 6894 N/M and expansion to I atm). The chamber pressure is
20 atm (abs.) and the mixture ratio is 1.65. The propellant tank pressure is 30 atm,
and the initial gas tank pressure is 150 atm. Allow for 3% excess propellant and 50%
excess gas to allow some nitrogen to dissolve in the propellant. The nitrogen regu
lator requires that the gas tank pressure does not fall below 29 atm.
2. What are the specific speeds of the four SSME pumps? (See the data given in Table
10-1.)
3. Compute the turbine power output for a gas consisting of 64% by weight of H20 and
36% by weight of 02, if the turbine inlet is at 30 atm and 658 K with the outlet at 1.4
atm and with 1.23 kg flowing each second. The turbine efficiency is 37%.
4. Compare the pump discharge gage pressures and the required pump powers for five
different pumps using water, gasoline, alcohol, liquid oxygen, and diluted nitric acid.
The respective specific gravities are 1.00, 0.720, 0.810, 1.14, and 1.37. Each pump
delivers 100 gal/min, a head of 1000 ft, and arbitrarily has a pump efficiency of 84%.
Answers: 433, 312, 350, 494, and 594 psi; 30.0, 21.6, 24.3, 34.2, and 41.1 hp.
5. The following data are given on a liquid propellant rocket engine:
Th~ ~~M
Thrust chamber specific impulse 210.2 sec
Fuel Gasoline (sp. gr. 0.74)
Oxidizer Red fuming nitric acid
(sp. gr. 1.57)
Thrust chamber mixture ratio 3.25
Turbine efficiency 58%
Required pump power 580 hp
Power to auxiliaries mounted on turbopump 50 hp
gear case
Gas generator mixture ratio 0.39
Turbine exhaust pressure 37 psia
Turbine exhaust nozzle area ratio 1.4
Enthalpy available for conversion in turbine 180 Btu/lb
per unit of gas
Specific heat ratio of turbine exhaust gas 1.3
Determine the engine system mixture ratio and the system specific impulse.
Answers: 3.07 and 208.
SYMBOLS
a acceleration, m/sec2 (ft/sec2 )
A area, m2 (ft2 )
cP specific heat at constant pressure, J/kg-K (Btu/lbm-R)
414 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
thrust coefficient (see Eq. 3~30)
diameter, m (ft)
thrust, N (!bf)
sea-level acceleration of gravity, 9.806 m/sec2 (32.17 ft/sec2 )
enthalpy change, J/kg (Btu/lb)
head, m (ft)
available pump suction head above vapor pressure, often called net
positive suction head, m (ft)
(Hs)R required pump suction head above vapor pressure, m (ft)
ls specific impulse, sec (lbf-sec/lbf)
k specific heat ratio
L length, m (ft)
111 mass flow rate, kg/sec
N shaft speed, rpm (rad/sec)
NS specific speed of pump
p pressure, N/m2 (lbf/in.2)
p power, W (hp)
Q volume flow rate, m3 /sec (ft3 /sec)
r flow mixture ratio (oxidizer to fuel flow)
s suction specific speed of pump
t time, sec
T absolute temperature, K (R)
u tip speed or mean blade speed, m/sec (ft/sec)
u velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
Greek Letters
t. finite differential
{d discharge correction factor
{F thrust correction factor
rJ efficiency
A coefficient of thermal expansion, m/m-K (in./in.-R)
p density, kg/m3 (lb/ft3 )
i/J constant
Subscripts
C chamber
e maximum efficiency
f fuel
gg gas generator
0 oxidizer
oa overall engine system
p pump
T turbine
REFERENCES 415
0 initial condition
I inlet
2 outlet
REFERENCES
10---1. M. L. Strangeland, "Turbopumps for Liquid Rocket Engines," Threshold, an
Engineering Journal of Power Technology, Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell
International, Canoga Park, CA, No. 3, Summer 1988, pp. 34-42.
10-2. A. Minnick and S. Peery, "Design and Development of an Advanced Liquid
Hydrogen Turbopump," A/AA Paper 98-3681, July 1998, and G. Crease, R.
Lyda, J. Park, and A. Minick, "Design and Test Results of an Advanced Liquid
Hydrogen Pump," A/AA Paper 99-2190, 1999.
10-3. V. M. Kalnin and V. A. Sherstiannikov, "Hydrodynamic Modelling of the
Starting Process in Liquid Propellant Engines," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 8,
1980, pp. 231-242.
10---4. T. Shimura and K. Kamijo, "Dynamic Response of the LE-5 Rocket Engine
Oxygen Pump," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 22, No. 2, March-April
1985.
10---5. M. C. Ek, "Solving Subsynchronous Whirl in the High Pressure Hydrogen
Turbomachinery of the Space Shuttle Main Engine," Journal of Spacecraft
and Rockets, Vol. 17, No. 3, May-June 1980, pp. 208-218, and M. Lalanne
and G. Ferraris, Rotordynamics Prediction in Engineering, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York, 1998, 433 pages.
10---6. R. W. Bursey, Jr., et al., "Advanced Hybrid Rolling Element Bearing for the
Space Shuttle Main Engine High Pressure Alternate Turbopump," A/AA Paper
96-3101, 1996.
10-7. K. Kamijo, E. Sogame, and A. Okayasu, "Development of Liquid Oxygen and
Hydrogen Turbopumps for the LE-5 Rocket Engine," Journal of Spacecraft and
Rockets, Vol. 19, No. 3, May-June 1982, pp. 226-231.
10---8. H. Yamada, K. Kamijo, and T. Fujita, "Suction Performance of High Speed
Cryogenic Inducers," A/AA Paper 83-1387, June 1983.
10-9. I. Karassik, W. C. Krutzsch, W. H. Fraser, and J. P. Messina (Eds.), Pump
Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1976 (waterhammer and
pumps).
10---10. C. E. Brennan, Hydrodynamics of Pumps, Concepts ETI, Inc. and Oxford
University Press, 1994.
10---11. S. Andersson and S. Trollheden, "Aerodynamic Design and Development of a
Two-Stage Supersonic Turbine for Rocket Engines," A/AA Paper 99-2192,
1999.
10---12. "Liquid Rocket Engine Turbines," NASA Space Vehicle Design Criteria
(Chemical Propulsion), NASA SP-8110, January 1974.
10-13. P. Brossel, S. Eury, P. Signol, H. Laporte, and J. B. Micewicz, "Development
Status of the Vulcain Engine," A/AA Paper 95-2539, 1995.
416 TURBOPUMPS, ENGINE DESIGN & CONTROLS, CALIBRATION, INTEGRATION
10--14. G. Mingchu and L. Guoqui, "The Oxygen/Hydrogen Engine for Long March
Vehicle," A/AA Paper 95-2838, 1995.
10--15. Y. Fukushima and T. Imoto, "Lessons Learned in the Development of the LE-5
and LE-7 Engines," A/AA Paper 94-3375, 1994, and M. Fujita and Y.
Fukushima, "Improvement of the LE-SA and LE-7 Engines," A/AA Paper
96-2847, 1996.
10-16. R. Iffly, "Performance Model of the Vulcain Ariane 5 Main Engine," A/AA
Paper 96-2609, 1996.
10--17. V. S. Rachuk, A. V. Shostak, A. I. Dimitrenko, G. I. Goncharov, R. Hernandez,
R. G. Starke, and J. Hulka, "Benchmark Testing of an Enhanced Operability
L0 /LH RD-0120 Engine," A/AA Paper 96-2609, 1996.
2 2
10--18. R. M. Mattox and J.B. White, "Space Shuttle Main Engine Controller," NASA
Technical Paper 1932, 1981, p. 19.
CHAPTER 11
SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET
FUNDAMENTALS
This is the first of four chapters on solid propellant rockets. It discusses the
burning rates, motor performance, grain configurations, and structural analy
sis. In solid propellant rocket motors-and the word "motor" is as common to
solid rockets as the word "engine" is to liquid rockets-the propellant is con
tained and stored directly in the combustion chamber, sometimes hermetically
sealed in the chamber for long-time storage (5 to 20 years). Motors come in
many different types and sizes, varying in thrust from about 2 N to over 4
million N (0.4 to over 1 million !bf). Historically, solid propellant rocket
motors have been credited with having no moving parts. This is still true of
many, but some motor designs include movable nozzles and actuators for
vectoring the line of thrust relative to the motor axis. In comparison to liquid
rockets, solid rockets are usually relatively simple, are easy to apply (they often
constitute most of the vehicle structure), and require little servicing; they can
not be fully checked out prior to use, and thrust cannot usually be randomly
varied in flight.
Figures 1-5 and 11-1 show the principal components and features of rela
tively simple solid propellant rocket motors. The grain is the solid body of the
hardened propellant and typically accounts for 82 to 94% of the total motor
mass. Design and stresses of grains are described later in this chapter.
Propellants are described in the next chapter. The igniter (electrically activated)
provides the energy to start the combustion. The grain starts to burn on its
exposed inner surfaces. The combustion and ignition of solid propellants are
discussed in Chapter 13. This grain configuration has a central cylindrical
cavity with eight tapered slots, forming an 8-pointed star. Many grains have
slots, grooves, holes, or other geometric features and they alter the initial
417
418 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
Composite solid Mounting
propellant grain flange
Igniter I
Insulation layer
/
Nozzle throat insert, carbon
.-------+------ 48.725 in.
Titanium 8-point star, internal Contoured exhaust
case burning grain cavity nozzle with carbon
phenolic inner liner
FIGURE 11-1. Cross section of the STAR™ 27 rocket motor, which has been used for
orbit and satellite maneuvers. It has an altitude thrust of 6000 !bf, nominally burns for
34.4 sec and has an initial mass of796 lbm. For more data see Table 11-3. (Courtesy of
Thiokol Propulsion, a Division of Cordant Technologies.)
burning surface, which determines the initial mass flow and the initial thrust.
The hot reaction gases flow along the perforation or port cavity toward the
nozzle. The inner surfaces of the case (really a pressure vessel), which are
exposed directly to hot gas, have a thermal protection or insulation layer to
keep the case from becoming too hot, in which case it could no longer carry its
pressure and other loads. The case is either made of metal (such as steel,
aluminum or titanium) or a composite fiber-reinforced plastic material.
The nozzle accelerates the hot gas; it is made of high temperature materials
(usually a graphite and/or an ablative material to absorb the heat) to withstand
the high temperatures and the erosion. The majority of all solid rockets have a
simple fixed nozzle, as shown here, but some nozzles have provision to rotate it
slightly so as to control the direction of the thrust to allow vehicle steering.
Chapter 14 describes nozzles, cases, insulators, liners, and the design of solid
propellant rocket motors.
Each motor is fastened to its vehicle by a thrust-carrying structure. In Fig.
11-1 there is a skirt (with a flange) integral with the case; it is fastened to the
vehicle.
The subject of thrust vector control, exhaust plumes, and testing are omitted
from these four chapters but are treated for both liquid and solid propellant
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 419
units in Chapters 16, 18, and 20, respectively. Chapter 17 provides a compar
ison of the advantages and disadvantages of solid and liquid propellant rocket
units. Chapters 3 to 5 are needed as background for these four chapters.
Applications for solid propellant rockets are shown in Tables 1-3, 1--4, and
11-1; each has its own mission requirements and thus propulsion requirements.
Figures 11-2, 11-3, and 11--4 illustrate representative designs for some of the
major categories of rocket motors listed in Table 11-1: namely, a large booster
or second stage, a motor for space flight, and a tactical missile motor.
Reference 11-1 is useful for component and design information.
There are several ways for classifying solid propellant rockets. Some are
listed in Table 11-2 together with some definitions. Table 11-3 gives charac
teristics for three specific rocket motors, and from these data one can obtain a
feeling for some of the magnitudes of the key parameters. These motors are
shown in Figs. 16-5 and 16-9.
Solid propellant rocket motors are being built in approximately 35 different
countries today, compared to only three countries about 50 years ago. The
technology is well enough understood and disseminated that many companies
or government arsenals are now capable of designing developing, and manu
facturing solid rockets in several categories.
Almost all rocket motors are used only once. The hardware that remains
after all the propellant has been burned and the mission completed-namely,
the nozzle, case, or thrust vector control device-is not reusable. In very rare
applications, such as the Shuttle solid booster, is the hardware recovered,
cleaned, refurbished, and reloaded; reusability makes the design more complex,
but if the hardware is reused often enough a major cost saving will result.
Unlike some liquid propellant rocket engines, a solid propellant rocket
motor and its key components cannot be operationally pretested. As a result,
individual motor reliability must be inferred by assuring the structural integrity
and verifying manufacturing quality on the entire population of motors.
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE
The rocket motor's operation and design depend on the combustion character
istics of the propellant, its burning rate, burning surface, and grain geometry.
The branch of applied science describing these is known as internal ballistics;
the effect of grain geometry is treated in Section 11.3.
The burning surface of a propellant grain recedes in a direction essentially
perpendicular to the surface. The rate of regression, usually expressed in cm/
sec, mm/sec, or in./sec, is the burning rater. In Fig. 11-5 we can visualize the
change of the grain geometry by drawing successive burning surfaces with a
constant time interval between adjacent surface contours. Figure 11-5 shows
this for a two-dimensional grain with a central cylindrical cavity with five slots.
Success in rocket motor design and development depends significantly on
knowledge of burning rate behavior of the selected propellant under all
( text continues on page 426)
Saddle attach Nozzle, intergral with three
fitting, dimensional carbon-carbon
aluminum i ntergral throat and entry
Forward Structure External section and with
adapter/closure Igniter- \ reinforcements Case, IM7 carbon/phenolic graphite
aluminum pyrogen for wing loads graphite/HBRF-55A epoxy insulation/cone
I
128cm
(50 in.}
dia.
L
Forward flap, Case bond, Internal insulation, Propellant, Flight termination
silica-filled EPDM SEL-133 aramid-filled EPDM HTPB-88% solids system, shaped charge
FIGURE 11-2. Booster rocket motor for the Pegasus air-launched three-stage satellite launch vehicle. It has a cylinder
grain cavity with fins. The 50 in. diameter case has structural reinforcements to attach the Pegasus vehicle to its launch
airplane and also to mount a wing to the case. It produces a maximum vacuum thrust of 726 kN (163,200 !bf) for 68.6 sec, a
vacuum specific impulse of 295 sec, with a propellant mass of 15,014 kg and an initial mass of 16,383 kg. (Courtesy of
Orbital Sciences, Corp. and Alliant Tech Systems.)
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 421
Motor case-Kevlar fibers
- reinforced; 63.4 in. diameter
Rolled up extension device
Movable nozzle extension,
conical sections in nested
or stowed position
Extended nozzle in
operating position
/
Aft skirt
for structural
support
Extended sheet metal /
strip is disconnected and
rotated out of way of
vectoring nozzle
FIGURE 11-3. Inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket motor with an extendible exit cone
(EEC). This motor is used for propelling upper launch vehicle stages or spacecraft. The
grain is simple (internal tube perforation). With the EEC and a thrust vector control, the
motor has a propellant fraction of 0.916. When launched, and while the two lower
vehicle stages are operating, the two conical movable nozzle segments are stowed
around the smaller inner nozzle segment. Each of the movable segments is deployed
in space and moved into its operating position by three identical light-weight, electri
cally driven actuators. The nozzle area ratio is increased from 49.3 to 181; this improves
the specific impulse by about 14 sec. This motor (without the EEC) is described in Table
11-3 and a similar motor is shown in Fig. 16-5. (Courtesy of United Technologies
Corp., Chemical Systems.)
Case with internal insulation Snap ring (2)
Forward Forward
closure skirt O ring groove (2) Aft
closure Blast
Insulation tube
Grain
9 in.
Igniter
39 in.
FIGURE 11-4. Simplified cross section through a typical tactical motor. The blast tube
allows the grain to be close to the center of gravity of the vehicle; there is very little
movement of the center of gravity. The nozzle is at the missile's aft end. The annular
space around the blast tube is usually filled with guidance, control, and other non
propulsive equipment. A free-standing grain is loaded before the aft closure is
assembled.
422 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
TABLE 11-1. Major Application Categories for Solid Propellant Rocket Motors
Category Application Typical Characteristics
Large booster Space launch vehicles; lower Large diameter (above 48 in.);
and second- stages of long-range ballistic L/ D of case = 2 to 7; burn
stage motors missiles time t = 60 to 120 sec; low
(see Figs. 11-2 and 14-2) altitude operations with low
nozzle area ratios (6 to 16)
High-altitude Upper stages of multistage High-performance propellant;
motors ballistic missiles, space launch large nozzle area ratio (20 to
vehicles; space maneuvers 200); L/ D of case = 1 to 2;
burn time t = 40 to 120 sec ( see
Fig. 11-3)
Tactical missiles !. High acceleration: short-range Tube launched, L/ D = 4 to 13;
bombardment, antitank very short burn time (0.25 to 1
missile sec); small diameter (2.75 to 18
in.); some are spin stabilized
2. Modest acceleration: air-to Small diameter (5 to 18 in.); L/D
surface, surface-to-air, short of case = 5 to 10; usually has
range guided surface-to-surface, fins and/or wings; thrust is high
and air-to-air missiles at launch and then is reduced
(boost-sustain); many have
blast tubes (see Fig. 11-4); wide
ambient temperature limits:
sometimes minimum
temperature -65° F or -53°C,
maximum temperature + l 60°F
or +7 1 °C; usually high
acceleration; often low-smoke
or smokeless propellant
Ballistic missile Defense against long- and Booster rocket and a small upper
defense medium-range ballistic missiles maneuverable stage with
multiple attitude control
nozzles and one or more side
or divert nozzles
Gas generator Pilot emergency escape; push Usually low gas temperature
missiles from submarine launch ( < l 300°C); many different
tubes or land mobile cannisters; configurations, designs, and
actuators and valves; short propellants; purpose is to create
term power supply; jet engine high-pressure, energetic gas
starter; munition dispersion; rather than thrust
rocket turbine drive starter;
automotive air bags
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 423
TABLE 11-2. Classification of Solid Rocket Motors
Basis of Classification Examples of Classification
Application See Table 11-1.
Diameter/Length 0.005-6.6 m or 0.2-260 in.; 0.025 to 45 m or I to 1800 in.
Propellant Composite: Heterogeneous (physical) mixture of powdered
metal (fuel), crystalline oxidizer and polymer binder
Double-base: Homogeneous mixture (colloidal) of two
explosives (usually nitroglycerin in nitrocellulose)
Composite-modified double-base: Combines composite and
double-base ingredients
Gas generator and others: See Chapter 12
Case design Steel monolithic: One-piece steel case
Fiber monolithic: Filament wound (high-strength fibers) with
a plastic matrix
Segmented: Case (usually steel) and grain are in segments
which are transported separately and fastened together at
launch site
Grain configuration Cylindrical: Cylindrically shaped, usually hollow
End-burning: Solid cylinder propellant grain
Other configurations: See Figs. 11-16 and 11-17
Grain installation Case-bonded: Adhesion exists between grain and case or
between grain and insulation and case; propellant is
usually cast into the case
Cartridge-loaded: Grain is formed separately from the motor
case and then assembled into case
Explosive hazard Class 1.3: Catastrophic failure shows evidence of burning
and explosion, not detonation
Class 1.1: Catastrophic failure shows evidence of detonation
Thrust action Neutral grain: Thrust remains essentially constant during the
burn period
Progressive grain: Thrust increases with time
Regressive grain: Thrust decreases with time
Pulse rocket: Two or more independent thrust pulses or
burning periods
Step-thrust rocket: Usually, two distinct levels of thrust
Toxicity Toxic and nontoxic exhaust gases
424 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
TABLE 11-3. Characteristics of Missile Motor and Space Motor
First Stage Orbus-6 STAR™ 27
Minuteman Inertial Upper Apogee
Characteristic Missile Motor" Stage Motol Motor°
Motor Performance ( 70° F, sea level)
Maximum thrust (!bf) 201,500 23,800 6,404 (vacuum)
Burn time average thrust (!bf) 194,600 17,175 6,010 (vacuum)
Action time average thrust (lbf)c 176,600 17,180 5,177 (vacuum)
Maximum chamber pressure (psia) 850 839 569
Burn time average chamber pressure 780 611 552
(psia)°
Action time average chamber pressure 720 604 502
(psia)°
Burn time/action time (seer 52.6/61.3 101.0/103.5 34.35/36.93
Ignition delay time (sec) 0.130 0.076
Total impulse (!bf-sec) 10,830,000 1,738,000 213,894
Burn time impulse (]bf-sec) 10,240,000 1,737,000
Altitude specific impulse (sec) 254 289.6 (vacuum) 290.8 (vacuum)
Temperature limits (°F) 60 to 80 45 to 82 20 to 100
Propellant
Composition:
NH4CI04 (%) 70 68 72
Aluminum(%) 16 18 16
Binder and additives(%) 14 14 12
Density (lbm/in.3 ) 0.0636 0.0635 0.0641
Burning rate at I 000 psia (in./sec) 0.349 0.276 0.280
Burning rate exponent 0.21 0.3 to 0.45 0.28
Temperature coeffcient of pressure 0.102 0.09 0.10
(%OF)
Adiabatic flame temperature (°F) 5790 6150 5,909
Characteristic velocity (ft/sec) 5180 5200 5,180
Propellant Grain
Type Six-point star Central 8-point star
perforation
Propellant volume (in.3 ) 709,400 94,490 11,480
Web (in.) 17.36 24.2 8.17
Web fraction (%) 53.3 77.7 60
Sliver fraction(%) 5.9 0 2.6
Average burning area (in.2 ) 38,500 3905 1,378
Volumetric loading(%) 88.7 92.4
Igniter
Type Pyrogen Pyrogen Pyrogen
Number of squibs 2 2 through-the 2
bulkhead
initiators
Minimum firing current (A) 4.9 NA 5.0
Weights (!bf)
Total 50,550 6515 796.3
Total inert 4719 513 60.6
Burnout 4264 478 53.4
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 425
TABLE 11-3. (Continued)
First Stage Orbus-6 STAR™ 27
Minuteman Inertial Upper Apogee
Characteristic Misisle Motor0 Stage Motol Motor0
Propellant 45,831 6000 735.7
Internal insulation 634 141 12.6
External insulation 309 0 0
Liner 150 Incl. with 0.4
insulation
Igniter 26 21 2.9 (empty)
Nozzle 887 143 20.4
Thrust vector control device Incl. with nozzle 49.4 0
Case 2557 200 23.6
Miscellaneous 156 4 0.7
Propellant mass fraction 0.912 0.921 0.924
Dimensions
Overall length (in.) 294.87 72.4 48.725
Outside diameter (in.) 65.69 63.3 27.30
Case
Material Ladish D6AC Kevlar fibers/epoxy 6 Al-4V titanium
steel
Nominal thickness (in.) 0.148 0.35 0.035
Minimum ultimate strength (psi) 225,000 165,000
Minimum yield strength (psi) 195,000 155,000
Hydrostatic test pressure (psi) 940 ~ 1030 725
Hydrostatic yield pressure (psi) 985 NA
Minimum burst pressure, psi 1225 76.7
Typical burst pressure, psi > 1350
Liner
Material Polymeric HTPB system TL-H-304
Insulation
Type Hydrocarbon- Silica-filled EPDM NA
asbestos
Density (lbm/in. 3 ) 0.0394 0.044
Nozzle
Number and type 4, movable Single, flexible Fixed, contoured
Expansion area ratio 10:1 47.3 48.8/45.94
Throat area (in.2 ) 164.2 4.207 5.900
Expansion cone half angle (deg) 11.4 Initial 27.4, Initial 18.9,
final 17.2 exit 15.5
Throat insert material Forged tungsten Three-dimensional 3D carbon-,;arbon
carbon-,;arbon
Shell body material AISI 4130 steel NA NA
Exit cone material NA Two-dimensional Carbon phenolic
carbon-,;arbon
a courtesy of Thiokol Propulsion, a Division of Cordant Technologies, Inc.
bCourtesy United Technologies Corp., Chemical Systems; there is also a version Orbus 6-E (see Fig. 11-3) with
an extendible, sliding nozzle; it has a specific impulse of 303.8 sec, a total weight of 6604 lb and a burnout weight
of 567 lb.
'Burn time and action time are defined in Fig. 11-13.
NA: not applicable or not available.
426 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
FIGURE 11-5. Diagram of successive burning surface contours, each a fixed small time
apart. It shows the growth of the internal cavity. The lengths of these contour lines are
roughly the same (within ±15%), which means that the burning area is roughly
constant.
motor operating conditions and design limit conditions. Burning rate is a
function of the propellant composition. For composite propellants it can be
increased by changing the propellant characteristics:
1. Add a burning rate catalyst, often called burning rate modifier (0.1 to
3.0% of propellent) or increase percentage of existing catalyst.
2. Decrease the oxidizer particle size.
3. Increase oxidizer percentage.
4. Increase the heat of combustion of the binder and/or the plasticizer.
5. Imbed wires or metal staples in the propellant.
Aside from the propellant formulation and propellant manufacturing process,
burning rate in a full-scale motor can be increased by the following:
1. Combustion chamber pressure.
2. Initial temperature of the solid propellant prior to start.
3. Combustion gas temperature.
4. Velocity of the gas flow parallel to the burning surface.
5. Motor motion (acceleration and spin-induced grain stress).
Each of these influencing factors will be discussed. The explanation of the
behavior of the burning rate with various parameters is largely found in the
combustion mechanism of the solid propellant, which is described in Chapter
13. Analytical models of the burning rate and the combustion process exist and
are useful for preliminary designs and for extending actual test data; for detail
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 427
designs and for evaluation of new or modified propellants, engineers need some
actual test data. Burning rate data are usually obtained in three ways-namely,
from testing by:
1. Standard strand burners, often called Crawford burners.
2. Small-scale ballistic evaluation motors.
3. Full-scale motors with good instrumentation.
A strand burner is a small pressure vessel (usually with windows) in which a
thin strand or bar of propellant is ignited at one end and burned to the other
end. The strand can be inhibited with an external coating so that it will burn
only on the exposed cross-sectional surface; chamber pressure is simulated by
pressurizing the container with inert gas. The burning rate can be measured by
electric signals from embedded wires, by ultrasonic waves, or by optical means
(Ref. 11~2). The burning rate measured on strand burners is usually lower than
that obtained from motor firing (by 4 to 12%) because it does not truly simu
late the hot chamber environment. Also small ballistic evaluation motors
usually have a slightly lower burning rate than full-scale larger motors, because
of scaling factors. The relationship between the three measured burning rates is
determined empirically for each propellant category and grain configuration.
Strand-burner data are useful in screening propellant formulations and in
quality control operations. Data from full-scale motors tested under a variety
of conditions constitute the final proof of burning-rate behavior. Obviously,
the strand burner and other substitutes for the full-scale motor must be
exploited to explore as many variables as practicable.
During development of a new or modified solid propellant, it is tested
extensively or characterized. This includes the testing of the burn rate (in
several different ways) under different temperatures, pressures, impurities,
and conditions. It also requires measurements of physical, chemical, and man
ufacturing properties, ignitability, aging, sensitivity to various energy inputs or
stimuli (e.g., shock, friction, fires), moisture absorption, compatibility with
other materials (liners, insulators, cases), and other characteristics. It is a
lengthy, expensive, often hazardous program with many tests, samples, and
analyses.
The burning rate of propellant in a motor is a function of many parameters,
m
and at any instant governs the mass flow rate of hot gas generated and
flowing from the motor (stable combustion):
(11-1)
Here Ab is the burning area of the propellant grain, r the burning rate, and Pb
the solid propellant density prior to motor start. The total mass m of effective
propellant burned can be determined by integrating Eq. 11~1:
428 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
Im I
m = dt = Pb Abr dt (11-2)
where Ab and r vary with time and pressure.
Burning Rate Relation with Pressure
Classical equations relating to burning rate are helpful in preliminary design,
data extrapolation, and understanding the phenomena; however, analytical
modeling and the supportive research have yet to adequately predict the burn
ing rate of a new propellant in a new motor. Elemental laws and equations on
burning rate usually deal with the influence of some of the important para
meters individually. Unless otherwise stated, burning rate is expressed for 70°F
or 294 K propellant (prior to ignition) burning at a reference chamber pressure
of 1000 psia or 6.895 MPa.
With many propellants it is possible to approximate the burning rates as a
function of chamber pressure, at least over a limited range of chamber pres
sures. A log-log plot is shown in Fig. 11-6. For most production-type propel
lants, this empirical equation is
r=apn (11-3)
1
where r, the burn rate, is usually in centimeters per second or inches per second,
and the chamber pressure p is in MPa or psia; a is an empirical constant
1
influenced by ambient grain temperature. This equation applies to all the com
monly used double-base, composite, or composite double-base propellants and
they are described in the next chapter. Also a is known as the temperature
coefficient and it is not dimensionless. The burning rate exponent n, sometimes
called the combustion index, is independent of the initial grain temperature and
describes the influence of chamber pressure on the burning rate. The change in
ambient temperature does not change the chemical energy released in combus
tion; it merely changes the rate of reaction at which energy is released.
The curves shown in Fig. 11-6 are calculated and are straight lines on a log
log plot; however, many actual burning rate plots deviate somewhat and the
actual data have some slight bends in parts of the curve, as seen in Fig. 11-7.
For a particular propellant and for wide temperature and pressure limits, the
burning rate can vary by a factor of 3 or 4. For all propellants they range from
about 0.05 to 75 mm/sec or 0.02 to 3 in./sec; the high values are difficult to
achieve, even with considerable burning rate catalyst additives, embedded
metal wires, or high pressures (above 14 MPa or 2000 psi). A technology
that would give a burning rate of more than 250 mm/sec at a chamber pressure
of 1000 psia is desired by motor designers for several applications.
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 429
__ ....f ..........
2.0 1 ... ,...,.. I
.. ~- • High burn rate
68,.°. F composite
1.- , 130°F
1.0 10°--
/ 100--
0.8 7' ./
./.// 68°F
L,/77 ,-1
0.6
i:;.; i:;,
~u Q) 00 .. 45 L ~.,_ P .l )a D .t Be >a u
- '---
Iv Zt :: -I., ? -i'P baN ~~- et y pp re o pd eo llu ab nl te _
.!: i-i-
~Q) 0.3 1 650 0° °F F ..- i...,l:::: .. --1 I
on -30°F...-1--::: Composite ammonium
.EC 0.2 v perchlorate propellant
c::o:, High energy
XLDB 140°F
composite ..~ - 60°
0.1 40° -
~
0.08 ..... ~
I..,
0.06 I~ ].,,,," I..,
0.05 ~ ~omposite ammonium->--
V nitrate propellant
0.04
0.03
300 400 600 1000 2000 3000
Chamber pressure, psi
FIGURE 11-6. Plot of the burning rate versus chamber pressure for several typical
solid rocket propellants, some at three different temperatures. A particular double base
plateau propellant shows a constant burning rate over a fairly wide pressure range.
Example 11-1. Tabulate the variation of burning rate with pressure for two propellants
with a1 = 0.00137, n1 = 0.9, a2 = 0.060, and n2 = 0.4, with p expressed in pounds per
square inch and r in inches per second.
SOLUTION. Use Eq. 11-3 and solve for several conditions, as shown below.
Pressure (psia) r (in./sec) r (in./sec)
1 2
500 0.367 0.720
1000 0.685 0.95
1500 0.994 1.11
2000 1.28 1.26
2500 1.56 1.33
From inspection of these results and also from Eq. 11-3, it can be seen that the
burning rate is very sensitive to the exponent n. For stable operation, n has
values greater than O and less than 1.0. High values of n give a rapid change of
burning rate with pressure. This implies that even a small change in chamber
pressure produces substantial changes in the amount of hot gas produced.
Most production propellants have a pressure exponent n ranging between
0.2 and 0.6. In practice, as n approaches I, burning rate and chamber pressure
430 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
1.0
u
<l)
J{>_
E
u
2 0.5
~
""
C
E
::, Diameter
llJ AP% (µm)
0.2 0 DB matrix 0
6 AP-CMDB 20 150
• AP-CMDB 30 150
OAP-CMDB 30 18
O.lL-.L......J......a.....J....J'--~~---l~~-'----l~..__.L......J'--'-...J....J'--~~--'
5 10 20 50 100 200
Pressure, atm
FIGURE 11-7. Measured burning rate characteristics of a double-base (DB) propellant
and three composite-modified double-base (CMDB) propellants which contain an
increasing percentage of small diameter (159 µm) particles of ammonium perchlorate
(AP). When the size of the AP particles is reduced or the percentage of AP is increased,
an increase in burning rate is observed. None of these data form straight lines.
(Reproduced with permission of the AIAA from Chapter I of Ref. 11-3.)
become very sensitive to one another and disastrous rises in chamber pressure
can occur in a few milliseconds. When the n value is low and comes closer to
zero, burning can become unstable and may even extinguish itself. Some pro
pellants display a negative n which is important for "restartable" motors or gas
generators. A propellant having a pressure exponent of zero displays essentially
zero change in burning rate over a wide pressure range. Plateau propellants are
those that exhibit a nearly constant burning rate over a limited pressure range.
One is shown with a dashed line in Fig. 11-6; they are relatively insensitive to
major changes in chamber pressure for a limited range of pressures. Several
double base propellants and a few composite propellants have this desirable
plateau characteristic. Table 12-1 lists the nominal burning rate r and the
pressure exponent n for several operational (production) propellants.
Burning Rate Relation with Temperature
Temperature affects chemical reaction rates and the initial ambient temperature
of a propellant grain prior to combustion influences burning rate, as shown in
Figs. 11-6 and 11-8. Common practice in developing and testing larger rocket
motors is to "condition" the motor for many hours at a particular temperature
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 431
before firing to insure that the propellant grain is uniformly at the desired
temperature. The motor performance characteristics must stay within specified
acceptable limits. For air-launched missile motors the extremes are usually
2 I 9 K ( -65°F) and 344 K ( I 60°F). Motors using typical composite propellant
experience a 20 to 35% variation in chamber pressure and a 20 to 30% varia
tion in operating time over such a range of propellant temperatures (see Fig.
I 1-8). In large rocket motors an uneven heating of the grain (e.g., by the sun
heating one side) can cause a sufficiently large difference in burning rate so that
a slight thrust misalignment can be caused (see Ref. I 1-4).
The sensitivity of burning rate to propellant temperature can be expressed in
the form of temperature coefficients, the two most common being
(I 1--4)
(11-5)
with ap, known as the temperature sensztzvzty of burning rate, expressed as
percent change of burning rate per degree change in propellant temperature
at a particular value of chamber pressure, and ;r:K as the temperature sensitivity
of pressure expressed as percent change of chamber pressure per degree change
in propellant temperature at a particular value of K. Here K is a geometric
function, namely the ratio of the burning surface Ab to nozzle throat area A
1•
The coefficient aP for a new propellant is usually calculated from strand
burner test data, and ;r:K from small-scale or full-scale motors. Mathematically,
+160°F
-~ 1500r-~--+_7_0°_F~p-r~op_e_11a_n_t~g-ra_in_t_e_m~pe_r_at_u_re~~~---
o.
i -65°F
:::,
V)
~ 1000
0.
Qi
..c
E
"'
. o.c 500 Typical composite propellant
Neutral burning grain
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Burning time, sec
FIGURE 11-8. Effect of propellant temperature on burning time and chamber pressure
for a particular motor. The integrated areas under the curves are proportional to the
total impulse, which is the same for the three curves.
432 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
these coefficients are the partial derivative of the natural logarithm of the
burning rate r or the chamber pressure p, respectively, with respect to propel
lant temperature T. Values for aP typically range between 0.001 and 0.009 per
degree Kelvin or 0.002 to 0.04 per degree F and for rrK it is 0.067 to 0.278%/°C
or 0.12 to 0.50%/°F. With rrK established, the effect of small grain temperature
changes on motor chamber pressure is expressed from Eq. 11-5:
(11---{))
where p is the reference chamber pressure and !).pis the pressure rise (psia) for
1
a value of !).T or T - T 0.
The values of rrK and aP depend primarily on the nature of the propellant
burning rate, the composition, and the combustion mechanism of the propel
lant. It is possible to derive a relationship between the two temperature sensi
tivities, namely
(11-7)
This formula is usually valid when the three variables are constant over the
chamber pressure and temperature range. When substituting the value of r
from Eq. 11-3 into Eq. 11-5, the temperature sensitivity aP can be also
expressed as
(11-8)
which then defines aP in terms of the changes in the temperature factor a at
constant chamber pressure.
It is not simple to predict the motor performance, because of changes in
grain temperature and manufacturing tolerances. Reference 11--4 analyses the
prediction of burning time.
Example 11-1. For a given propellant with a neutrally burning grain the value of the
temperature sensitivity at constant burning area is rrK = 0.005/°F or 0.5%/°F; the value
of the pressure exponent n is 0.50. The burning rater is 0.30 in./sec at 70°F at a chamber
pressure of PI = 1500 psia and an effective nominal burning time of 50 sec. Determine
the variation in PI and tb for a change of ±50°F or from + 20°F to + 120°F assuming
that the variation is linear.
SOLUTION. First Eq. 11-5 is modified:
rrK = /:1.p/(pI/:1.T) = /:1.p/[1500(±50)] = 0.005
Solving, /:1.p = ±375 psi or a total excursion of about 750 psi or 50% of nominal
chamber pressure.
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 433
The total impulse or the chemical energy released in combustion stays essentially
constant as the grain ambient temperature is changed; only the rate at which it is
released is changed. The thrust at high altitude is approximately proportional to the
chamber pressure (with A and CF assumed to be essentially constant in the equation
1
F = CFp 1A 1) and the thrust will change also, about in proportion to the chamber
pressure. Then the burning time is approximately
t 1 = 50 x 1500/(1500 - 375) = 66.7 sec
t2 = 50 x 1500/(1500 + 375) = 40.0 sec
The time change 66.7 - 40.0 = 26.7 sec is more than 50% of the nominal burning time.
The result would be somewhat similar to what is described in Fig. 11-8.
In this example the variation of chamber pressure affects the thrust and
burning time of the rocket motor. The thrust can easily vary by a factor of
2, and this can cause significant changes in the vehicle's flight path when
operating with a warm or a cold grain. The thrust and chamber pressure
increases are more dramatic if the value of n is increased. The least variation
in thrust or chamber pressure occurs when n is small (0.2 or less) and the
temperature sensitivity is low.
Burning Enhancement by Erosion
Erosive burning refers to the increase in the propellant burning rate caused by
the high-velocity flow of combustion gases over the burning propellant sur
face. It can seriously affect the performance of solid propellant rocket
motors. It occurs primarily in the port passages or perforations of the
grain as the combustion gases flow toward the nozzle; it is more likely to
occur when the port passage cross-sectional area A is small relative to the
throat area A with a port-to-throat area ratio of 4 or less. An analysis of
1
erosive burning is given in Ref. 11-5. The high velocity near the burning
surface and the turbulent mixing in the boundary layers increase the heat
transfer to the solid propellant and thus increase the burning rate. Chapter 10
of Ref. 11-3 surveys about 29 different theoretical analytical treatments and a
variety of experimental techniques aimed at a better understanding of erosive
burning.
Erosive burning increases the mass flow and thus also the chamber pressure
and thrust during the early portion of the burning, as shown in Fig. 11-9 for a
particular motor. As soon as the burning enlarges the flow passage (without a
major increase in burning area), the port area flow velocity is reduced and
erosive burning diminishes until normal burning will again occur. Since pro
pellant is consumed more rapidly during the early erosive burning, there
usually is also a reduction of flow and thrust at the end of burning. Erosive
burning also causes early burnout of the web, usually at the nozzle end, and
exposes the insulation and aft closure to hot combustion gas for a longer
period of time; this usually requires more insulation layer thickness (and
434 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
Erosive burning
Burning time
FIGURE 11-9. Typical pressure-time curve with and without erosive burning.
more inert mass) to prevent local thermal failure. In designing motors, erosive
burning is either avoided or controlled to be reproducible from one motor to
the next.
A relatively simple model for erosive burning, based on heat transfer, was
first developed in 1956 by Lenoir and Robillard (Refs. 11-3 and 11-6) and
has since been improved and used widely in motor performance calculations.
It is based on adding together two burn rates: r 0, which is primarily a func
tion of pressure and ambient grain temperature (basically Eq. 11-3) without
erosion, and re, the increase in burn rate due to gas velocity or erosion
effects.
(11-9)
Here G is the mass flow velocity per unit area in kg/m2-sec, Dis a characteristic
dimension of the port passage (usually, D = 4Ap/ S, where AP is the port area
and Sis its perimeter), pis the density of the unburned propellant (kg/m3), and
a and f3 are empirically constants. Apparently, f3 is independent of propellant
formulation and has a value of about 53 when r is in m/sec, p is in pascals, and
1
G is in kg/m2-sec. The expression of a was determined from heat transfer
considerations to be
a=0.02 -88 -cp ~µ,0 ~2P -r-2 -13 -T -1 - -T -s (11-10)
PbCs T2 - Tp
11.1. PROPELLANT BURNING RATE 435
Here cP is the average specific heat of the combustion gases in kcal/kg-K, µ, the
gas viscosity in kg/m-sec, Pr the dimensionless Prandtl number (µ,cp/K) based
on the molecular properties of the gases, K the thermal conductivity of the gas,
cs the heat capacity of the solid propellant in kcal/kg-K, T the combustion gas
1
reaction absolute temperature, T, the solid propellant surface temperature, and
TP the initial ambient temperature within the solid propellant grain.
Figure 11-10 shows the augmentation ratio r/r 0, or the ratio of the burning
rate with and without erosive burning, as a function of gas velocity for two
similar propellants, one of which has an iron oxide burn rate catalyst.
Augmentation ratios up to 3 can be found in some motor designs. There is a
pressure drop from the forward end to the aft end of the port passage, because
static pressure energy is converted into kinetic gas energy as the flow is accel
erated. This pressure differential during erosive burning causes an extra axial
load and deformation on the grain, which must be considered in the stress
analysis. The erosion or burn rate augmentation is not the same throughout
the length of the port passage. The erosion is increased locally by turbulence if
there are discontinuities such as protrusions, edges of inhibitors, structural
supports, or gaps between segmented grains.
Propellant types
2.0 D Formulation (I) 6 Formulation (IV)
AP 73% AP 72%
0 HTPB 27% HTPB 26%
-!::
'- dAP 20 µm Fe 20 3 2%
:;0 :; 1.8 ro 0.687 cm/sec dAP 20 µm
~ ro 1.265 cm/sec
C:
.5!
2
(C l): 1.6
E x= 9cm
00
r:: o:, p = 4.25 MPa
00 T= 2250 K
C:
E
:::, 1.4
.0 (I)
<l)
."".
"'
2
w
1.2
(IV)
1.0
200 300 400 500 600 700
Freestream velocity, m/sec
FIGURE 11-10. Effect of gas velocity in the perforation or grain cavity on the erosive
burning augmentation factor, which is the burning rate with erosion r divided by the
burning rate without erosion r 0. (Reproduced with permission of the AIAA from
Chapter 10 of Ref. 11-3.)
436 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
Other Burning Rate Enhancements
Enhancement of burning rate can be expected in vehicles that spin the rocket
motor about its longitudinal axis (necessary for spin-stabilized flight) or have
high lateral or longitudinal acceleration, as occurs typically in antimissile rock
ets. This phenomenon has been experienced with a variety of propellants, with
and without aluminum fuel, and the propellant formulation is one of the con
trolling variables (see Fig. 11 - 11 ). Whether the acceleration is from spin or
longitudinal force, burning surfaces that form an angle of 60 to 90° with the
acceleration vector are most prone to burning rate enhancement. For example,
spinning cylindrical interal burning grains are heavily affected. The effect of
spin on a motor with an operational composite propellant internal burning
grain is shown in Fig. 11-12. The accelerated burning behavior of candidate
propellants for a new motor design is often determined in small-scale motors,
or in a test apparatus which subjects burning propellant to acceleration (Ref.
l 1-8). The stresses induced by rapid acceleration or rapid chamber pressure
rise can cause crack formation (see Refs. 11-9 and 11-10), which exposes
additional burning surface.
The burning rate of the propellant in an end-burning grain at a location
immediately adjacent to or near the propellant-to-insulation bondline along
the case wall, can, depending on the propellant formulation and manufacturing
process, be higher than that of the propellant elsewhere in the grain.
The embedding of wires or other shapes of good metal heat conductors in the
propellant grain increases the burning rate. One technique has several silver
wires arranged longitudinally in an end-burning grain (see Ref. l 1-11).
Depending on wire size and the number of wires per grain cross-sectional
area, the burning rate can easily be doubled. Aluminum wires are about half
as effective as silver wires. Other forms of heat conductors have been wire
...
-...:. ra = burning rate, acceleration imposed
r = burning rate without acceleration
C: p = 500 psia
0
~ 3.0 90° orientation
C:
Q E) E107 18% Al, 29 µ.
bD
:::,
"'
.l!l
f" 2.0
bD
.CE: BUU 3% Al, 15
:::,
'°
PBAA 16% Al, 26 µ.
50 100 150
Acceleration, g
FIGURE 11-11. Acceleration effect on burning rate for three different propellants.
(Adapted with permission from Ref. 11-7.)
11.2. BASIC PERFORMANCE RELATIONS 437
800
;§ 600
t5
.:c:,
I- 400
200
0
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Time, sec
FIGURE 11-12. Effect of axial spin on the thrust-time behavior of a rocket motor with
composite propellant using aluminum and PBAN (polybutadiene acrylonitrile) as fuels.
(Adapted with permission from Ref. 11-7.)
staples (short bent wires) mixed with the propellant pnor to the casting
operation.
Intense radiation emissions from the hot gases in the grain cavity transfer
heat to the burning propellant surfaces. More energetic radiation causes an
increase in burning rate. Radiation of the exhaust plume ( outside of the nozzle)
and the effect of particles in the gas are discussed in Chapter 18.
Combustion instability, also called oscillatory combustion, can affect the
burning rate of the propellant because of increased heat-transfer rate, gas
velocity, and high pressure. This is discussed in Chapter 13.
11.2. BASIC PERFORMANCE RELATIONS
One basic performance relation is derived from the principle of conservation of
matter. The propellant mass burned per unit time has to equal the sum of the
change in gas mass per unit time in the combustion chamber grain cavity and
the mass flowing out through the exhaust nozzle per unit time.
(11-11)
The term on the left side of the equation gives the mass rate of gas generation
from Eq. 11-1. The first term on the right gives the change in propellant mass
in the gas volume of the combustion chamber, and the last term gives the
438 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
nozzle flow according to Eq. 3-24. The burning rate of the propellant is r; Ah is
the propellant burning area; Pb is the solid propellant density; p is the chamber
1
gas density; V is the chamber gas cavity volume, which becomes larger as the
1
propellant is expended; Ar is the throat area; p is the chamber pressure; T is
1 1
the absolute chamber temperature, which is usually assumed to be constant;
and k is the specific heat ratio of the combustion gases. During startup the
changing mass of propellant in the grain cavity becomes important. The pre
ceding equation can be simplified and is useful in some numerical solutions of
transient conditions, such as during start or shutdown.
The value of the burning surface Ab may change with time and is a function
of the grain design, as described in Section 11.3. For preliminary performance
calculations the throat area Ar is usually assumed to be constant for the total
burning duration. For exact performance predictions, it is necessary also to
include the erosion of the nozzle material, which causes a small increase in
nozzle throat area as the propellant is burned; this nozzle enlargement is
described in Chapter 14. The larger value of Ar causes a slight decrease in
chamber pressure, burning rate, and thrust.
The gas volume V will increase greatly with burn time. If the gas mass in
1
the motor cavity is small, and thus if the rate of change in this gas mass is small
relative to the mass flow through the nozzle, the term d(p V )/dt can be
1 1
neglected. Then a relation for steady burning conditions can be obtained
from Eqs. 11-3 and 11-11:
P1/k[2/(k + l)](k+Il/(k-1)
~~~~~~~~~-=K
Pbr.fJ{Ji
J (11-12)
(p 1)1-n k[2/(k + l)](k+l)/(k-1)
Pba.fJ{Ji
As an approximation, the chamber pressure can be expressed as a function of
the area ratio of the burning surface to the nozzle throat cross section for a
given propellant:
(11-13)
The ratio of the burning area to the nozzle throat area is an important
quantity in solid propellant engineering and is given the separate symbol K.
Equations 11-12 and 11-13 show the relation between burning area, chamber
pressure, throat area, and propellant properties. For example, this relation
permits an evaluation of the variation necessary in the throat area if the
chamber pressure (and therefore also the thrust) is to be changed. For a pro
pellant with n = 0.8, it can be seen that the chamber pressure would vary as the
fifth power of the area ratio K. Thus, small variations in burning surface can
have large effects on the internal chamber pressure and therefore also on the
11.2. BASIC PERFORMANCE RELATIONS 439
burning rate. The formation of surface cracks in the grain (due to excessive
stress) can cause an unknown increase in Ab. A very low value of n is therefore
desirable to minimize the effects of small variations in the propellant charac
teristics or the grain geometry.
Using this equation and the definition of the characteristic velocity c* from
Eq. 3-32, one can write
(11-14)
Here a and Pb are constants and c* does not really vary much. This can be
rewritten
=
PI (Kapbc*)I/(1-n) (11-15)
The equations above are based on the very simple mathematical dependence
of burning rate on chamber pressure. However, for many propellants, this
simplification is not sufficiently valid. For accurate evaluation, experimental
values must be found.
Those parameters that govern the burning rate and mass discharge rate of
motors are called internal ballistic properties; they include r, K, ap, nK, and the
influences caused by pressure, propellant ingredients, gas velocity, or accelera
tion. The subsequent solid propellant rocket parameters are performance para
meters; they include thrust, ideal exhaust velocity, specific impulse, propellant
mass fraction, flame temperature, temperature limits, and duration.
The ideal nozzle exhaust velocity of a solid propellant rocket is dependent on
the thermodynamic theory as given by Eq. 3-15 or 3-16. As explained in
Chapter 5, this equation holds only for frozen equilibrium conditions; for
shifting equilibrium the exhaust velocity is best defined in terms of the enthalpy
drop (h 1 - h 2), which can be computed from v 2 = J2(h 1 - h 2). In deriving the
exhaust velocity equation, it was assumed that the approach velocity of gases
upstream of the nozzle is small and can be neglected. This is true if the port
area AP (the flow area of gases between and around the propellant grains) is
relatively large compared to the nozzle throat area A When the port-to
1•
throat-area ratio AP/ A is less than about 4, a pressure drop correction must
1
be made to the effective exhaust velocity.
The thrust for solid propellant rockets is given by the identical definitions
developed in Chapters 2 and 3, namely, Eqs. 2-14 and 3-29. The flame or
combustion temperature is a thermochemical property of the propellant formu
lation and the chamber pressure. It not only affects the exhaust velocity, but
also the hardware design, flame radiation emission, materials selection, and the
heat transfer to the grain and hardware. In Chapter 5 methods for its calcula
tion are explained. The determination of the nozzle throat area, nozzle expan
sion area ratio, and nozzle dimensions is discussed in Chapter 3.
440 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
The effective exhaust velocity c and the specific impulse / are defined by Eqs.
5
2-3, 2-4, and 2-6. It is experimentally difficult to measure the instantaneous
propellant flow rate or the effective exhaust velocity. However, total impulse
and total propellant mass consumed during the test can be measured. The
approximate propellant mass is determined by weighing the rocket before
and after a test. The effective propellant mass is often slightly less than the
total propellant mass, because some grain designs permit small portions of the
propellant to remain unburned during combustion, as is explained in a later
chapter. Also, a portion of the nozzle and insulation materials erodes and
vaporizes during the rocket motor burning and this reduces the final inert
mass of the motor and also slightly increases the nozzle mass flow. This
explains the difference between the total inert mass and the burnout mass in
Table 11-3. It has been found that the total impulse can be accurately deter
mined in testing by integrating the area under a thrust time curve. For this
reason the average specific impulse is usually calculated from total measured
impulse and effective propellant mass. The total impulse 1 is defined by Eq.
1
2-1 as the integration of thrust F over the operating duration th:
( 11-16)
where F is an average value of thrust over the burning duration th·
The burning time, action time, and pressure rise time at ignition are defined in
Fig. 11-13. Time zero is actually when the firing voltage is applied to the
ignition squib or prime charge. Visible exhaust gas will actually come out of
the rocket nozzle for a period longer than the action time, but the effluent mass
flow ahead and behind the action time is actually very small. These definitions
are somewhat arbitrary but are commonly in use and documented by standards
such as Ref. 2-2.
For flight tests it is possible to derive the instantaneous thrust from the
measured flight path acceleration (reduced by an estimated drag) and the
estimated instantaneous mass from the chamber pressure measurements,
which is essentially proportional to the rocket nozzle mass flow; this gives
another way to calculate specific impulse and total impulse.
As explained in Section 3.6, there are at least four values of specific impulse:
(I) theoretical specific impulse, (2) delivered or actual values as measured from
flight tests, static tests, or demonstrations (see Ref. 11-12), (3) delivered specific
impulse at standard or reference conditions, and (4) the minimum guaranteed
value. Merely quoting a number for specific impulse without further explana
tion leaves many questions unanswered. This is similar to the four performance
values for liquid propellant engines listed in Section 3.6. Specific impulse as
diminished by several losses can be predicted as shown in Ref. 11-13.
Losses include the nozzle inefficiencies due to viscous boundary layer fric
tion and nonaxial flow as described in Chapter 3, thrust vector deflection as
described in Chapter 16, residual unburned propellants, heat losses to the walls
11.2. BASIC PERFORMANCE RELATIONS 441
t,
:::,
:S
0 75% of
ii'. max.
:::, value
<f>
<f>
aQ::)
lgnitionH
delay
time
------tb = burning time-----~
--+------ta = action time-----+--.-
Ignition rise time
FIGURE 11-13. Definitions of burning time and action time.
or insulators, incomplete combustion, or the presence of solid particles in the
gas which need to be accelerated. There are also some performance gains; the
gases (created by ablation of the ablative nozzle and insulators or the igniter
propellants) contribute to an increased mass flow, in many cases also to a
somewhat lower average molecular weight of the gas and to a slight reduction
of the final inert mass after rocket motor operation.
The two-phase flow equations for calculating specific impulse can be solved if
the size distribution, shape, and percentage of solid particles in the exhaust gas
are known. The assumption of a uniform average spherical particle diameter
simplifies the analysis (Ref. 11-13), and this diameter can be estimated from
specific impulse measurements on rocket motor tests (Ref. 11-14). Section 3.5
gives a simple theory for two-ptase flow of solid particles in a gas flow.
Sometimes density-specific impulse, the specific gravity of the propellant grain
multiplied by specific impulse, is stated as a performance parameter, particu
larly in rocket motor applications where a compact design is desirable (see Eq.
7-3).
Propellants burn to varying degrees of completeness depending on the fuel,
the oxidizer, their ratios, the energy losses, and the environment within the
motor. Propellants with nonmetal fuels usually burn with a velocity correction
factor of 97 or 98%, as contrasted to 90 to 96% for propellants with aluminum
powder as the fuel. The solid particles in the exhaust do not contribute to the
gas expansion, require energy to be accelerated, and two-phase flow is less
442 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
efficient. However, the addition of the aluminum increases the heat of combus
tion, the chamber gas temperature, and thus the exhaust velocity or specific
impulse. This increase usually outweighs the loss for having to accelerate the
small solid aluminum oxide particles.
The propellant mass fraction l; was defined in Eq. 2-8 as l; = mp/m and it is
0
directly related to the motor mass ratio and therefore also to the flight perfor
mance of the vehicle. The initial motor mass m is the sum of the useful solid
0
propellant mass mp and the non-burning, inert hardware mass of the motor.
For a vehicle's propellant mass fraction, the payload mass and the nonpropul
sion inert mass (vehicle structure, guidance and control, communications
equipment, and power supply) have to be added. A high value of l; indicates
a low inert motor mass, an efficient design of the hardware, and high stresses.
This parameter has been used to make approximate preliminary design esti
mates. It is a function of motor size or mass, thrust level, the nozzle area ratio,
and the material used for the case. For very small motors (less than 100 Ibm)
the value of the propellant fraction is between 0.3 and 0.75. Medium-sized
motors (100 < m < 1000 Ibm) have l; values between 0.8 and 0.91. For larger
0
motors (1000 < m < 50,000 Ibm) l; is between 0.88 and 0.945. A range of values
0
is given for each category, because of the influence of the following other
variables. Medium- and large-sized motors with steel cases generally have
lower l; values than those with titanium cases, and their values are lower
than for cases made of Kevlar fibers in an epoxy matrix. The highest values
are for cases made of graphite or carbon fibers in an epoxy matrix. The l; values
are lower for larger area ratio nozzles and motors with thrust vector control.
The STA R TM 27 rocket motor, shown in Fig. I 1-I and described in Table
I 1-3, has a propellant mass fraction of 0.924. This is high for a medium
sized motor with a titanium metal case and a relatively large nozzle exit section.
A number of performance parameters are used to evaluate solid propellant
rockets and to compare the quality of design of one rocket with another. The
first is the total-impulse-to-loaded-weight ratio (!/wG). The loaded weight wG is
1
the sea-level initial gross weight of propellant and rocket propulsion system
hardware. Typical values for It!wG are between 100 and 230 sec, with the
higher values representative of high-performance rocket propellants and highly
stressed hardware, which means a low inert mass. The total-impulse-to-Ioaded
weight ratio ideally approaches the value of the specific impulse. When the
weight of hardware, metal parts, inhibitors, and so on becomes very small in
relation to the propellant weight wp, then the ratio ! /wG approaches lt!w,
1
which is the definition of the average specific impulse (Eqs. 2-3 and 2-4).
The higher the value of It!wG, the better the design of a rocket unit.
Another parameter used for comparing propellants is the volume impulse; it
is defined as the total impulse per unit volume of propellant grain, or Ii/ Vb.
The thrust-to-weight ratio F /wG is a dimensionless parameter that is iden
tical to the acceleration of the rocket propulsion system (expressed in multiples
of g 0) if it could fly by itself in a gravity-free vacuum; it excludes other vehicle
component weights. It is peculiar to the application and can vary from very low
11.2. BASIC PERFORMANCE RELATIONS 443
values of less than one g to over 1,000 g for high acceleration applications of
0 0
solid propellant rocket motors. Some rocket assisted gun munitions have accel
erations of 20,000 g 0.
The temperature limits refer to the maximum and minimum storage tem
peratures to which a motor can be exposed without risk of damage to the
propellant grain. They are discussed further in Section 11.4.
Example 11-3. The following requirements are given for a solid propellant rocket
motor:
Sea level thrust 2000 !bf average
Duration 10 sec
Chamber pressure 1000 psia
Operating temperature Ambient (approx. 70°F)
Propellant Ammonium nitrate-hydrocarbon
Determine the specific impulse, the throat and exit areas, the flow rate, the total pro
pellant weight, the total impulse, the burning area, and an estimated mass assuming
moderately efficient design. Properties for this propellant are: k = 1.26; T = 2700°F =
1
3160 R; r = 0.10 in./sec at 1000 psia; c' = 4000 ft/sec; Pb= 0.056 lb/in.3 ; molecular
weight= 22 lbm/lb-mol; gas constant= 1544/22 = 70.2 ft-lbf/lbm-R.
SOLUTION. From Figs. 3--4 and 3-6, CF= 1.57 (fork= 1.26, with optimum expan
sion at sea level and a pressure ratio of 1000/14.7 = 68) and E = A 2/A
1
= 7.8. The ideal
thrust coefficient has to be corrected for nozzle losses. Assume a correction of 0.98; then
CF= 0.98 x 1.57 = 1.54. The specific impulse is (Eq. 3-32).
ls= c*CF/g0 = (4000 x 1.54)/32.2 = 191 sec
The required throat area is obtained from Eq. 3-31:
2
A = F/(p CF) = 2000/(1000 x 1.54) = 1.30 in.
1 1
2
The exit area is 7.8 x 1.30 = I 0.1 in. The nozzle weight fl.ow rate is obtained from Eq.
w
2-5, namely = F/ls = 2000/191 = 10.47 lbf/sec. The effective propellant weight for a
duration of IO sec is therefore approximately 105 !bf. Allowing for residual propellant
and for inefficiencies on thrust buildup, the total loaded propellant weight is assumed to
be 4% larger, namely, 105 x 1.04 = 109 !bf.
The total impulse is from Eq. 2-2: Ir= Ftb = 2000 x 10 = 20,000 !bf-sec. This can
also be obtained from Ir = w x ls = I 05 x 191 = 20,000 !bf-sec. The propellant burning
surface can be found by using Eq. 11-12:
ArP1Jk[2/(k + l)](k+l)/(H)
Ab = ---''---------
Pbr.JRf 1
----------
1.30 X 1000 32.2 X J.26 (0. 885)8 7 = 1840 in.2
0.056 X 0.JO (1544/22) X 3160
444 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
This result can also be obtained from Eq. 11-11 or 11-14. The ratio is given by
K = Ab/A = 1840/1.30 = 1415
1
The loaded gross weight of the rocket motor (not the vehicle) can only be estimated after
a detailed design has been made. However, an approximate guess can be made by
choosing a total impulse to weight ratio of perhaps 143.
WG = /tf(/tfwG) = 20,000/143 = 140 Jbf
Beause the propellants account for 109 !bf, the hardware parts can be estimated as 14
0-109=3llbf.
11.3. PROPELLANT GRAIN AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION
The grain is the shaped mass of processed solid propellant inside the rocket
motor. The propellant material and geometrical configuration of the grain
determine the motor performance characteristics. The propellant grain is a
cast, molded, or extruded body and its appearance and feel is similar to that
of hard rubber or plastic. Once ignited, it will burn on all its exposed surfaces
to form hot gases that are then exhausted through a nozzle. A few rocket
motors have more than one grain inside a single case or chamber and very
few grains have segments made of different propellant composition (e.g., to
allow different burning rates). However, most rockets have a single grain.
There are two methods of holding the grain in the case, as seen in Fig.
11-14. Cartridge-loaded or freestanding grains are manufactured separately
from the case (by extrusion or by casting into a cylindrical mold or cartridge)
and then loaded into or assembled into the case. In case-bonded grains the case
is used as a mold and the propellant is cast directly into the case and is bonded
to the case or case insulation. Free-standing grains can more easily be replaced
Case with
Forward Insulation inner liner
support
Cartridge
Grain Case Flange insulation
Cartridge-loaded grain Case-bonded grain
(free-standing)
FIGURE 11-14. Simplified schematic diagrams of a free-standing (or cartridge-loaded)
and a case-bonded grain.
11.3. PROPELLANT GRAIN AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION 445
if the propellant grain has aged excessively. Aging is discussed in the next
chapter. Cartridge-loaded grains are used in some small tactical missiles and
a few medium-sized motors. They often have a lower cost and are easier to
inspect. The case-bonded grains give a somewhat better performance, a little
less inert mass (no holding device, support pads, and less insulation), a better
volumetric loading fraction, are more highly stressed, and often somewhat
more difficult and expensive to manufacture. Today almost all larger motors
and many tactical missile motors use case bonding. Stresses in these two types
of grains are briefly discussed under structural design in the next section.
Definitions and terminology important to grains include:
Configuration: The shape or geometry of the initial burning surfaces of a
grain as it is intended to operate in a motor.
Cylindrical Grain: A grain in which the internal cross section is constant
along the axis regardless of perforation shape. (see Fig. 11-3).
Neutral Burning: Motor burn time during which thrust, pressure, and burn
ing surface area remain approximately constant (see Fig. 11-15), typically
within about ±15%. Many grains are neutral burning.
Perforation: The central cavity port or flow passage of a propellant grain; its
cross section may be a cylinder, a star shape, etc. (see Fig. 11-16).
Progressive Burning: Burn time during which thrust, pressure, and burning
surface area increase (see Fig. 11-15).
Regressive Burning: Burn time during which thrust, pressure, and burning
surface area decrease (see Fig. 11-15).
Sliver: Unburned propellant remaining (or lost-that is, expelled through
the nozzle) at the time of web burnout (see sketch in Problem 11-6).
Time
FIGURE 11-15. Classification of grains according to their pressure-time
characteristics.
446 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
Bonded insulation Chamber
Propellant
•
End-burner {case bonded), neutral burn
~<bthicko~b
• [ ~
Internal burning tube, progressive
Slots and tube, neutral burn
Radial grooves and tube, neutral burn
Star {neutral) Wagon wheel Multi perforated
(neutral) (progressive-regressive)
Dog bone Dendrite
(case bonded)
FIGURE 11-16. Simplified diagrams of several grain configurations.
Burning Time, or Effective Burning Time, tb: Usually, the interval from 10%
maximum initial pressure (or thrust) to web burnout, with web burnout
usually taken as the aft tangent-bisector point on the pressure-time trace
(see Fig. 11-13).
Action Time, ta: The burning time plus most of the time to burn slivers;
typically, the interval between the initial and final 10% pressure (or
thrust) points on the pressure-time trace (see Fig. 11-13).
11.3. PROPELLANT GRAIN AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION 447
Deflagration Limit: The minimum pressure at which combustion can still be
barely self-sustained and maintained without adding energy. Below this
pressure the combustion ceases altogether or may be erratic and unsteady
with the plume appearing and disappearing periodically.
Inhibitor: A layer or coating of slow- or nonburning material (usually, a
polymeric rubber type with filler materials) applied (glued, painted,
dipped, or sprayed) to a part of the grain's propellant surface to prevent
burning on that surface. By preventing burning on inhibited surfaces the
initial burning area can be controlled and reduced. Also called restrictor.
Liner: A sticky non-self-burning thin layer of polymeric-type material that is
applied to the cases prior to casting the propellant in order to promote
good bonding between the propellant and the case or the insulator. It also
allows some axial motion between the grain periphery and the case.
Internal Insulator: An internal layer between the case and the propellant
grain made of an adhesive, thermally insulating material that will not
burn readily. Its purpose is to limit the heat transfer to and the tempera
ture rise of the case during rocket operation. Liners and insulators can be
seen in Figs. 11-1, 11-2, 11-4, and 11-14, and are described in Chapter
12.
Web Thickness, b: The minimum thickness of the grain from the initial
burning surface to the insulated case wall or to the intersection of another
burning surface; for an end-burning grain, b equals the length of the grain
(see Fig. 11-16).
Web Fraction, b : For a case-bonded internal burning grain, the ratio of the
1
web thickness b to the outer radius of the grain:
b = b/radius = 2b/diameter (11-17)
1
Volumetric Loading Fraction, v : The ratio of propellant volume Vb to the
1
chamber volume Ve (excluding nozzle) available for propellant, insula
tion, and restrictors. Using Eq. 2-4 and Vb = m/ p:
(11-18)
where I is the total impulse, Is the specific impulse, and Pb the propellant
1
density.
A grain has to satisfy several interrelated requirements:
1. From the flight mission one can determine the rocket motor requirements.
They have to be defined and known before the grain can be designed.
They are usually established by the vehicle designers. This can include
total impulse, a desired thrust-time curve and a tolerance thereon, motor
mass, ambient temperature limits during storage and operation, available
448 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
vehicle volume or envelope, and vehicle accelerations caused by vehicle
forces (vibration, bending, aerodynamic loads, etc.).
2. The grain geometry is selected to fit these requirements; it should be
compact and use the available volume efficiently, have an appropriate
burn surface versus time profile to match the desired thrust-time curve,
and avoid or predictably control possible erosive burning. The remaining
unburned propellant slivers, and often also the shift of the center of
gravity during burning, should be minimized. This selection of the geo
metry can be complex, and it is discussed in Refs. 11-1 and 11-7 and also
below in this section.
3. The propellant is usually selected on the basis of its performance cap
ability (e.g., characteristic velocity), mechanical properties (e.g.,
strength), ballistic properties (e.g., burning rate), manufacturing charac
teristics, exhaust plume characteristics, and aging properties. If neces
sary, the propellant formulation may be slightly altered or "tailored"
to fit exactly the required burning time or grain geometry. Propellant
selection is discussed in Chapter 12 and in Ref. 11-7.
4. The structural integrity of the grain, including its liner and/or insulator,
must be analyzed to assure that the grain will not fail in stress or strain
under all conditions of loading, acceleration, or thermal stress. The grain
geometry can be changed to reduce excessive stresses. This is discussed in
the next section of this chapter.
5. The complex internal cavity volume of perforations, slots, ports, and fins
increases with burning time. These cavities need to be checked for reso
nance, damping, and combustion stability. This is discussed in Chapter
13.
6. The processing of the grain and the fabrication of the propellant should
be simple and low cost (see Chapter 12).
The grain configuration is designed to satisfy most requirements, but some
times some of these six categories are satisfied only partially. The geometry is
crucial in grain design. For a neutral burning grain (approximately constant
thrust), for example, the burning surface Ab has to stay approximately con
stant, and for a regressive burning grain the burning area will diminish during
the burning time. From Eqs. 11-3 and 11-14 the trade-off between burning
rate and the burning surface area is evident, and the change of burning surface
with time has a strong influence on chamber pressure and thrust. Since the
density of most modern propellants falls within a narrow range (about 0.066
lbm/in.3 or 1830 kg/m3 + 2 to -15%), it has little influence on the grain design.
As a result of motor developments of the past three decades, many grain
configurations are available to motor designers. As methods evolved for
increasing the propellant burning rate, the number of configurations needed
decreased. Current designs concentrate on relatively few configurations, since
the needs of a wide variety of solid rocket applications can be fulfilled by
11.3. PROPELLANT GRAIN AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION 449
combining known configurations or by slightly altering a classical configura
tion. The trend has been to discontinue configurations that give weak grains
which can form cracks, produce high sliver losses, have a low volumetric
loading fraction, or are expensive to manufacture.
The effect of propellant burning on surface area is readily apparent for
simple geometric shapes such as rods, tubes, wedges, and slots, as shown in
the top four configurations of Fig. 11-16. Certain other basic surface shapes
burn as follows: external burning rod-regressive; external burning wedge
regressive. Most propellant grains combine two or more of these basic surfaces
to obtain the desired burning characteristic. The star perforation, for example,
combines the wedge and the internal burning tube. Figure 11-17 indicates
typical single grains with combinations of two basic shapes. The term conocyl
is a contraction of the words cone and cylinder.
Configurations that combine both radial and longitudinal burning, as does
the internal-external burning tube without restricted ends, are frequently
referred to as "three-dimensional grains" even though all grains are geometri
cally three-dimensional. Correspondingly, grains that burn only longitudinally
r:,
\
'
,,J
Conocyl (case-bonded) Finocyl (case-bonded)
Spherical (case-bonded) with slots and cylinder
FIGURE 11-17. Typical common grain configurations using combinations of two basic
shapes for the grain cavity.
450 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
or only radially are "two-dimensional grains." Grain configurations can be
classified according to their web fraction b , their length-to-diameter ratio
1
L/ D, and their volumetric loading fraction v . These three dependent variables
1
are often used in selecting a grain configuration in the preliminary design of a
motor for a specific application. Obvious overlap of characteristics exists with
some of the configurations, as given in Table 11---4 and shown by simple
sketches in Fig. 11-16. The configurations listed above the line in the table
are common in recent designs. The bottom three were used in earlier designs
and usually are more difficult to manufacture or to support in a case. The end
burner has the highest volumetric loading fraction, the lowest grain cavity
volume for a given total impulse, and a relatively low burning area or thrust
with a long duration. The internal burning tube is relatively easy to manufac
ture and is neutral burning with unrestricted ends of L/D ::::: 2. By adding fins
or cones (see Fig. 11-17) this configuration works for 2 < L/ D < 4. The star
configuration is ideal for web fractions of 0.3 to 0.4; it is progressive above 0.4,
but can be neutralized with fins or slots. The wagon wheel is structurally
superior to the star shape around 0.3 and is necessary at a web fraction of
0.2 (high thrust and short burn time). Dendrites are used in the lowest web
fraction when a relatively large burning area is needed (high thrust and short
duration), but stresses may be high. Although the limited number of config
urations given in this table may not encompass all the practical possibilities for
fulfilling a nearly constant thrust-time performance requirement, combinations
of these features should be considered to achieve a neutral pressure-time trace
and high volumetric loading before a relatively unproven configuration is
accepted. The capabilities of basic configurations listed in these tables can be
TABLE 11-4. Characteristics of Several Grain Configurations
Pressure-time
Web L/D Volumetric Burning C.G.
Configuration Fraction ratio Fraction Characteristics shift
End burner > 1.0 NA 0.90-0.98 Neutral Large
Internal burning tube 0.5---0.9 1-4 0.80-0.95 Neutrala Small to
(including slotted moderate
tube, trumpet,
conocyl, finocyl)
Segmented tube (large 0.5---0.9 >2 0.80-0.95 Neutral Small
grains)
Internal stal 0.3---0.6 NA 0.75---0.85 Neutral Small
Wagon Whed 0.2---0.3 NA 0.55---0.70 Neutral Small
Dendriteb 0.1---0.2 1-2 0.55---0.70 Neutral Small
Internal-external 0.3---0.5 NA 0.75---0.85 Neutral Small
burning tube
Rod and tube 0.3---0.5 NA 0.60-0.85 Neutral Small
Dog boneb 0.2---0.3 NA 0.70-0.80 Neutral Small
0Neutral if ends are unrestricted, otherwise progressive.
hHas up to 4 or sometimes 8% sliver mass and thus a gradual thrust termination.
NA: not applicable or not available.
11.3. PROPELLANT GRAIN AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION 451
extended by alterations. The movement of the center of gravity influences the
flight stability of the vehicle. Relative values of this CG shift are also shown in
Table 11-4. Most solid propellant manufacturers have specific approaches and
sophisticated computer programs for analyzing and optimizing grain geometry
alternatives and permitting burn surface and cavity volume analysis. See Refs.
11-15 and 11-16 and Chapters 8 and 9 of Ref. 11-1.
The end burning grain (burning like a cigarette) is unique; it burns solely in
the axial direction and maximizes the amount of propellant that can be placed
in a given cylindrical motor case. In larger motors (over 0.6 m diameter) these
end burners show a progressive thrust curve. Figure 11-18 shows that the
burning surface soon forms a conical shape, causing a rise in pressure and
thrust. Although the phenomenon is not fully understood, two factors contri
bute to higher burning rate near the bondline: chemical migration of the burn
ing rate catalyst into and towards the bondline, and local high propellant
stresses and strains at the bond surface, creating local cracks (Ref. 11-17).
Rockets used in air-launched or certain surface-launched missile applica
tions, weather rockets, certain antiaircraft or antimissile rockets, and other
tactical applications actually benefit by reducing the thrust with burn time.
A high thrust is desired to apply initial acceleration, but, as propellant is
consumed and the vehicle mass is reduced, a decrease in thrust is desirable;
this limits the maximum acceleration on the rocket-propelled vehicle or its
sensitive payload, often reduces the drag losses, and usually permits a more
effective flight path. Therefore, there is a benefit to vehicle mass, flight perfor
mance, and cost in having a higher initial thrust during the boost phase of the
flight, followed by a lower thrust ( often IO to 30% of boost thrust) during the
sustaining phase of the powered flight. Figure 11-19 shows grains which give
two or more discrete thrust periods in a single burn operation. The configura
tions are actually combinations of the configurations listed in Table 11-4.
Initial
burning surface
FIGURE 11-18. Schematic diagram of end-burning grain coning effect. In larger sizes
(above approximately 0.5 m diameter) the burning surface does not remain flat and
perpendicular to the motor axis, but gradually assumes a conical shape. The lines in the
grain indicate successively larger-area burning surface contours.
452 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
~;:::J
Single grain. Boost with radial
burning, sustain with end burning
~ ~
- ; : J
Dual end burning grains with two
propellants of different burning rates.
Not used today, because the
manufacture is more expensive
~ ~
~:J;:::J
Single grain. Boost with large burning
area, sustain with smaller burning area
(both radial)
~ ~
~ j ; : : J Single grain. Boost-sustain-boost,
with different burning areas
(all radial burning)
@
@
FIGURE 11-19. Several simplified schematic diagrams of grain configurations for an
initial period of high thrust followed by a lower-thrust period.
In a single-propellant dual-thrust level solid rocket motor, factors relating to
the sustain portion usually dominate in the selection of the propellant type and
grain configuration if most of the propellant volume is used during the longer
sustain portion.
A restartable rocket motor has advantages in a number of tactical rocket
propulsion systems used for aircraft and missile defense applications. Here two
(or sometimes three) grains are contained inside the same case, each with its
own igniter. The grains are physically separated typically by a structural bulk
head or by an insulation layer. One method for accomplishing this is shown in
Fig. 11-20. The timing between thrust periods (sometimes called thrust pulses)
can be controlled and commanded by the missile guidance system, so as to
change the trajectory in a nearly optimum fashion and minimize the flight time
to target. The separation mechanism has to prevent the burning-hot pressur
ized gas of the first grain from reaching the other grain and causing its inad
vertent ignition. When the second grain is ignited the separation devices are
automatically removed, fractured, or burned, but in such a manner that the
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN 453
Grain tor Rib support Bulkhead Metal case with Grain tor
second pulse structure internal insulation first pulse
Burst diaphragm with Igniter
insulation on right side
FIGURE 11-20. Simplified diagram of one concept of a two-pulse experimental rocket
motor with two grains separated by a bulkhead. During the first pulse operation the
metal diaphragm is supported by a spider-web-like structure made of high temperature
material. Upon ignition of the second stage, the scored diaphragm is loaded in the other
direction; it breaks and its leaves peel back. The bulkhead opening has a much larger
area than the nozzle throat.
fragments of hardware pieces will not plug the nozzle or damage the insulation
(see Refs. 11-18 and 11-19).
Slivers
Any remaining unburnt propellant is known as slivers. Figure 11-5 and the
figure in Problem 11-6 show small slivers or pieces of unburnt propellant
remaining at the periphery of the grain, because the pressure went below the
deflagration limit (see Ref. 11-20). About 25 years ago grain designs had 2 to
7% propellant slivers; this useless material caused a reduction in propellant
mass fraction and vehicle mass ratio. The technology of grain design has
advanced so that there are almost no slivers (usually less than I%). If slivers
were to occur in a new unusual grain design, the designer would try to replace
the sliver volume with lower-density insulator, which gives less of a mass ratio
penalty than the higher-density propellant residue. This is shown in Fig. 11-17.
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN
The objective of stress analysis of rocket motors is to design the configuration
of the grain, the liners, or the grain support in such a way that excessive stresses
or excessive strains will not occur and so that there will be no failure. Static and
dynamic loads and stresses are imposed on the propellant grains during man
ufacture, transportation, storage, and operation. Structurally, a rocket motor
is a thin shell of revolution (motor case) almost completely filled with a vis-
454 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
coelastic material, the propellant, which usually accounts for 80 to 94% of the
motor mass. Propellant has some mechanical properties that are not found in
ordinary structural materials and these have received relatively little study. The
viscoelastic nature of solid propellant is time-history dependent and the mate
rial accumulates damage from repeated stresses; this is known as the cumula
tive-damage phenomenon.
The most common failure modes are:
1. Surface cracks are formed when the surface strain is excessive. They open
up new additional burning surfaces and this in turn causes the chamber
pressure as well as the thrust to be increased. The higher, shorter dura
tion thrust will cause the vehicle to fly a different trajectory and this may
cause the mission objective to be missed. With many cracks or deep
cracks, the case becomes overpressurized and will fail. The limiting strain
depends on the stress level, grain geometry, temperature, propellant age,
load history, and the sizes of flaws or voids. At a high strain rate, deeper,
more highly branched cracks are more readily formed than at a lower
strain rate (see Ref. 11-9).
2. The bond at the grain periphery is broken and an unbonded area or gap
can form next to the liner, insulator, or case. As the grain surface
regresses, a part of the unbonded area will become exposed to the hot,
high-pressure combustion gases, and then suddenly the burning area is
increased by the unbonded area.
Other failure modes, such as an excessively high ambient grain temperature
causing a large reduction in the physical strength properties, ultimately result
in grain cracks and/or debonding. Air bubbles, porosity, or uneven density can
locally reduce the propellant strength sufficiently to cause failure, again by
cracks or debonds. Other failure modes are excessive deformations of the
grain (e.g., slump of large grains can restrict the port area) and involuntary
ignition due to the heat absorbed by the viscoelastic propellant from excessive
mechanical vibration (e.g., prolonged bouncing during transport).
If the grain has a large number of small cracks or a few deep cracks or large
areas of unbonding prior to firing, the burning area will increase, often pro
gressively and unpredictably, and the resulting higher pressure will almost
always cause the case to burst. A few small cracks or minor unbonded areas
will usually not impede satisfactory motor operation.
Material Characterization
Before a structural analysis can be performed it is necessary to understand the
materials and obtain data on their properties. The grain materials (propellant,
insulator, and liner) are rubber-like materials that are nearly incompressible.
They all have a bulk modulus in compression of at least 1400 MPa or about
200,000 psi in their original state (undamaged). Since there are very few voids
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN 455
in a properly made propellant (much less than 1% ), its compression strain is
low. However, the propellant is easily damaged by applied tension and shear
loads. If the strength of propellant in tension and shear (typically betwen 50
and 1000 psi) is exceeded, the grain will be damaged or fail locally. Since grains
are three-dimensional, all stresses are combined stresses and not pure compres
sion stresses, and grains are thus easily damaged. This damage is due to a
"dewetting" of the adhesion between individual solid particles and the binder
in the propellant and appears initially as many small voids or porosity. Those
very small holes or debonded areas next to or around the solid particles may
initially be under vacuum, but they become larger with strain growth.
The propellant, liner, and insulator with a solid filler are viscoelastic materi
als. They show a nonlinear viscoelastic behavior, not a linear elastic behavior.
This means that the maximum stress and maximum elongation or strain dimin
ish each time a significant load is applied. The material becomes weaker and
suffers some damage with each loading cycle or thermal stress application. The
physical properties also change with the time rate of applying loads; for exam
ple, very fast pressurization actually gives a stronger material. Certain binders,
such as hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB), give good elongation and
a stronger propellant than other polymers used with the same percentage of
binder. Therefore HTPB is a preferred binder today. The physical properties
are also affected by the manufacturing process. For example, tensile specimens
cut from the same conventionally cast grain of composite propellant can show
20 to 40% variation in the strength properties between samples of different
orientations relative to the local casting slurry flow direction. Viscoelastic
material properties change as a function of prior loading and damage history.
They have the capability to reheal and recover partially following damage.
Chemical deterioration will in time degrade the properties of many propellants.
These phenomena make it difficult to characterize these materials and predict
their behavior or physical properties in engineering terms.
Several kinds of laboratory tests on small samples are routinely performed
today to determine the physical properties of these materials. (see Refs. 11-21
and 11-22). Simple tests, however, do not properly describe the complex non
linear behavior. These laboratory tests are conducted under ideal conditions
mostly uniaxial stresses instead of complex three-dimensional stresses-with a
uniform temperature instead of a thermal gradient and usually with no prior
damage to the material. The application of laboratory test results to real
structural analysis therefore involves several assumptions and empirical correc
tion factors. The test data are transformed into derived parameters for deter
mining safety margins and useful life, as described in Chapter 9 of Ref. 11-1.
There is no complete agreement on how best to characterize these materials.
Nevertheless, laboratory tests provide useful information and several are
described below.
The most common test is a simple uniaxial tensile test at constant strain rate.
One set of results is shown in Fig. 11-21. The test is commonly used for
manufacturing quality control, propellant development, and determining fail-
456 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
=
E initial modulus
Em = nominal strain at maximum stress
Er= nominal strain at rupture
Ed= dewetting strain (slope departs
from its maximum)
<Tm= nominal maximum stress
<Tr= nominal stress at rupture
100
After some
/accumulated
80 .i_ -_ -- damage
;---
/
/
I
·- 60 I
en
C. I
eev ni I
en I
40 I
I
~
20
OL-~~_j__~~~L-......l...~_j__~~~L-~-"----'--~~~-
0 5 10 15 20 25
Percent strain, in.fin. x 100
FIGURE 11-21. Stress-strain curves for a typical composite-type solid propellant
showing the effect of cumulative damage. The maximum stress am is higher than the
rupture stress a,, of the tensile test sample.
ure criteria. Once the sample has been loaded, unloaded, and restressed several
times, the damage to the material changes its response and properties as shown
by the dashed curve in Fig. 11-21.
The dewetting strain is, by definition, the strain (and corresponding max
imum stress) where incipient failure of the interface bonds between small solid
oxidizer crystals and the rubbery binder occurs. The dewetting stress is analo
gous to the yield point in elastic materials, because this is when internal mate
rial damage begins to happen. The slope E, the modulus at low strain, is not
ordinarily used in design, but is often used as a quality control parameter. Data
from several such uniaxial tests at different temperatures can then be manipu
lated to arrive at allowable stresses, permissible safe strains, and a derived
artificial modulus, as described later. Once a case-bonded grain has been
cooled down from its casting temperature it will have shrunk and be under
multidirectional strain. Samples cut from different parts of a temperature
cycled grain will usually give different tensile test results.
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN 457
Biaxial strength tests are also performed frequently in the laboratory. One
type is described in Ref. 11 -21. Meaningful three-dimensional stress tests are
difficult to perform in the laboratory and are usually not done. There are other
sample tests that give information about propellant behavior, such as strain
endurance tests to obtain the levels of strain at which the propellant has long
endurance and does not suffer significant damage, tests at constant stress
levels, fracture tests of samples with known cracks or defects, tensile tests
under simulated chamber pressure, or tests to measure the thermal coefficient
of expansion. Peel tests of the adhesive bonds of propellants to liners or insu
lators are very common and their failures are discussed in Ref 11-22. The
application and interpretation of all these tests depend on the stress conditions
in the grain and company preferences. In addition, strain or stress measure
ments are made occasionally on full-scale, experimental, flight-weight motors
using special embedded sensors. Care must be taken that the implanting of
these sensors into the grain will not disturb the local stress-strain distribution,
which would lead to erroneous measurements.
The maximum failure stresses of most propellants are relatively low com
pared to those of plastic materials. Typical values range from about 0.25 to 8
MPa or about 40 to about 1200 psi, with average values between 50 and 300
psi, and elongations range from 4 to 250%, depending on the specific propel
lant, its temperature, and its stress history. Table 11-5 shows properties for a
relatively strong propellant. Some double-base propellants and binder-rich
composite propellants can withstand higher stresses (up to about 32 MPa or
4600 psi). The pressure and the strain rate have a major influence on the
physical properties. Tensile tests performed at chamber pressure give higher
strength than those done at atmospheric pressure, in some cases by a factor of 2
or more. High strain rates (sudden-start pressurization) can also improve the
propellant properties temporarily.
The strength properties of the grain material are commonly determined over
a range of propellant temperatures. For air-launched missiles these limits are
TABLE 11-5. Range of Tensile Properties of Reduced Smoke Composite Propellant
for a Tactical Missilea
Temperature (°F)
158 77 -40
Maximum stress (psi) 137-152 198-224 555-633
Modulus (psi) 262-320 420-483 5120--6170
Strain at maximum stress/strain 54/55-65/66 56/57-64/66 46/55-59/63
and at ultimate stress (%)
"Polybutadiene binder with reduced aluminum and ammonium perchlorate; data are from four
different 5-gallon mixes.
Source: Data taken with permission of the AIAA from Ref. 11-23.
458 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
wide, with -65°F and +160°F or 219 Kand 344 K often being the lower and
upper extremes expected during motor exposure. Propellant grains must be
strong enough and have elongation capability sufficient to meet the high stress
concentrations present during shrinkage at low temperature and also under the
dynamic load conditions of ignition and motor operation. The mechanical
properties (strength, elongation) can be increased by increasing the percent
of binder material in the propellant, but at a reduction in performance.
Structural Design
The structural analysis of a typical case-bonded grain has to consider not only
the grain itself but also the liner, insulator, and case, which interact structurally
with the propellant grain under various loading conditions (see Chapter 9 or
Ref. 11-1). The need to obtain strong bonds between the propellant and the
liner, the liner and the insulator, or the insulator and the case is usually satis
fied by using properly selected materials and manufacturing procedures to
assure a good set of bonds. Liners are usually flexible and can accept large
strains without failure, and the vehicle loads can be transmitted from the case
(which is usually part of the vehicle structure) into the propellant.
When the propellant is cured (heated in an oven), it is assumed to have
uniform internal temperature and to be free of thermal stresses. As the grain
cools and shrinks after cure and reaches an equilibrium uniform ambient tem
perature (say, from -40 to + 75°F), the propellant experiences internal stresses
and strains which can be relatively large at low temperature. The stresses are
increased because the case material usually has a thermal coefficient of expan
sion that is smaller than that of the propellant by an order of magnitude. The
stress-free temperature range of a propellant can be changed by curing the
motor under pressure. Since this usually reduces the stresses at ambient tem
perature extremes, this pressure cure is now being used more commonly.
The structural analysis begins when all loads can be identified and quanti
fied. Table 11-6 lists the typical loads that are experienced by a solid propellant
motor during its life cycle and some of the failures they can induce. Some of
these loads are unique to specific applications. The loads and the timing of
these loads during the life cycle of a solid propellant rocket motor have to be
analyzed for each application and each motor. They depend on the motor
design and use. Although ignition and high accelerations (e.g., impact on a
motor that falls off a truck) usually cause high stresses and strains, they may
not always be the critical loads. The stresses induced by ambient environmental
temperature cycling or gravity slumps are often relatively small; however, they
are additive to stresses caused by other loads and thus can be critical. A space
motor that is to be fired within a few months after manufacture presents a
different problem than a tactical motor that is to be transported, temperature
cycled, and vibrated for a long time, and this is different yet from a large
diameter ballistic missile motor that sits in a temperature-conditioned silo for
more than 10 years.
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN 459
TABLE 11--6. Summary of Loads and Likely Failure Modes in Case-Bonded Rocket
Motors
Description of Load and Critical Stress
Load Source Area
1. Cool-down during manufacture after Temperature differential across case and
hot cure grain; tension and compression stresses
on grain surfaces; hot grain, cool case
2. Thermal cycling during storage or Alternative hot and cold environment;
transport critical condition is with cold grain, hot
case; two critical areas: bond-line tensile
stress (tearing), inner-bore surface
cracking
3. Improper handling and transport Shock and vibration, 5 to 30g forces
0
vibrations during road transport at 5 to 300 Hz
(5 to 2500 Hz for external aircraft
carry) for hours or days; critical failure:
grain fracture or grain debonding
4. Ignition shock/pressure loading Case expands and grain compresses; axial
pressure differential is severe with end
burning grains; critical areas; fracture
and debonding at grain periphery
5. Friction of internal gas flow in Axially rearward force on grain
cavity
6. Launch and axial flight acceleration Inertial load mostly axial; shear stress at
bond line; slump deformation in large
motors can reduce port diameter
7. Flight maneuvers (e.g., antimissile High side accelerations cause
rocket) unsymmetrical stress distribution; can
result in debonding or cracks
8. Centrifugal forces in spin-stabilized High strain at inner burning surfaces;
projectiles/missiles cracks will form
9. Gravity slump during storage; only Stresses and deformation in perforation
in large motors can be minimized by rotating the motor
periodically; port area can be reduced
by slump
10. External air friction when case is Heating of propellant, liner and insulators
also the vehicle's skin will lower their strengths causing
premature failure. Induces thermal
stresses
Furthermore, the structural analysis requires a knowledge of the material
characteristics and failure criteria: namely, the maximum stress and strains that
can safely be accepted by the propellant under various conditions. The failure
criteria are derived from cumulative damage tests, classical failure theories,
actual motor failures, and fracture mechanics. This analysis may be an iterative
460 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
analysis, because the materials and geometry need to be changed if analysis
shows that the desired margins of safety are exceeded.
Ideally, the analysis would be based on a nonlinear viscoelastic stress theory;
however, such an approach is still being developed and is not yet reliable (see
Ref. 11-1). An analysis based on a viscoelastic material behavior is feasible,
relatively complex, and requires material property data that are difficult to
obtain and uncertain in value. Most structural analyses today are based on
an elastic material model; it is relatively simple and many two- and three
dimensional finite element analysis computer programs of this approach are
available at rocket motor manufacturing companies. Admittedly, this theory
does not fit all the facts, but with some empirical corrections it has given
approximate answers to many structural grain design problems. An example
of a two-dimensional finite element grid from a computer output is shown in
Fig. 11-22 for a segment of a grain using an elastic model (see Refs. 11-24 and
11-25).
With elastic materials the stress is essentially proportional to strain and
independent of time; when the load is removed, the material returns to its
original condition. Neither of these propositions is valid for grains or their
propellant materials. In viscoelastic material a time-related dependency exists
between stresses and strains; the relationship is not linear and is influenced by
the rate of strain. The stresses are not one-dimensional as many laboratory
tests are, but three-dimensional, which are more difficult to visualize. When the
load is removed, the grain does not return to its exact original position.
References 11-26 and 11-27 and Chapters 9 and 10 of Ref. 11-1 discuss
three-dimensional analysis techniques and viscoelastic design. A satisfactory
analysis technique has yet to be developed to predict the influence of cumula
tive damage.
Various techniques have been used to compensate for the nonelastic beha
vior by using allowable stresses that have been degraded for nonlinear effects
and/or an effective modulus that uses a complex approximation based on
laboratory strain test data. Many use a modified modulus (maximum stress
strain at maximum stress or am/Em in Fig. 11-21) called the stress relaxation
modulus ER in a master curve against temperature-compensated time to failure,
as shown in Fig. 11-23. It is constructed from data collected from a series of
uniaxial tests at constant strain rate (typically, 3 to 5%) performed at different
temperatures (typically -55 to +43°C). The shifted temperature T /T is shown
5
in the inset on the upper right for 3% strain rate and sample tests taken at
different temperatures. The factor ).. in the ordinate corrects for the necking
down of the tension sample during test. The small inset in this figure explains
the correction for temperature that is applied to the reduced time to failure.
The empirical time-temperature shift factor aT is set to zero at ambient tem
peratures (25°C or 77°F) and graphically shifted for higher and lower tempera
tures. The master curve then provides time-dependent stress-strain data to
calculate the response of the propellant for structural analysis (see Ref. 11-
21 and Chapter 9 of Ref. 11-1 ).
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN 461
Annular grooves
FIGURE 11-22. Finite element analysis grid of the forward end of a cast grain in a
filament-wound plastic case. The grain has an internal tube and annular grooves. The
top diagram shows the model grid elements and the bottom shows one calculated strain
or deformation condition. (Reprinted with permission from A. Turchot, Chapter 10 of
Ref. 11-1).
462 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
6000
Nominal stress= 3%
~
.... Temp. °F LogaT T8!T
E 3000 " -40.0 4.00 1.285
b' ~ 0 23.0 1.38 1.100
0 71.0 0.00 1.000
~
·;;; ll. 120.0 -1.19 0.915
a w. 1000 ' 0 141.0 -1.40 0.889
15 ER (5 yr)= 65 psi at 70 °F
., ."< :e' 6 '- I ~ h E ER R ( (25 y mr o)= )= 6 7 8 8p s pi s ia t a t4 28 3 ° F °F
-: 00: , 200 •... 4 i--"\ x.I.
" " ~
~E ,R -(O.l -sec)= 3150 psi at 23 °F
E 100 ! \+-
~C 0 60 0 I >-~-x ,.. ..... ...,J<--x
"X ' -2 I
ai
0:: -80 -40 0 40 80 120 160
Temperature °F
10
10-7 lQ-6 10-s lQ-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107
Reduced time, (t!ar>, min
FIGURE 11-23. This stress-relaxation modulus master curve for a particular composite
solid propellant is constructed from manipulated data taken from a number of uniaxial
tensile tests at constant strain rate but different temperatures. (Reproduced with permis
sion of United Technologies Corp., Chemical Systems from Ref. 11-27.)
Usually, several different grain loading and operating conditions need to be
analyzed. Such a structural analysis is useful for identifying locations of max
imum stress or strain and to any structural members or grain sectors that are
too weak or too heavy, but these analyses have not always been successful. The
choice of the best analysis tool and the best pseudo-viscoelastic compensation
factors will depend on the experience of the stress analyst, the specific motor
design conditions, the complexity of the motor, the geometry, and suitable,
available, valid propellant property data.
In a case-bonded motor, special provision is required to reduce the stress
concentrations at the grain ends where the case and grain interface, especially
for motors expected to operate satisfactorily over a wide range of temperatures.
Basically, the high stresses arise from two primary sources. First, the physical
properties, including the coefficient of thermal expansion of the case material
and the propellant, are grossly dissimilar. The coefficient of expansion of a
typical solid propellant is 1.0 x 10-4 m/m-K, which is five times as great as
that of a steel motor case. Secondly, the aft-end and head-end geometries at
the grain-case juncture often present a discontinuity, with the grain stress the
oretically approaching infinity. Actually, finite stresses exist because viscoplastic
deformations do occur in the propellant, the liner, and the case insulation.
Calculating the stress in a given case-grain termination arrangement is usually
impractical, and designers rely on approximations supported by empirical data.
For simple cylindrical grains the highest stresses usually occur at the outer
and inner surfaces, at discontinuities such as the bond surface termination
point, or at stress concentration locations, such as sharp radii at the roots or
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN 463
tips of star or wagonwheel perforations, as shown in Fig. 11-16. Figure 11-24
shows a stress relief flap, sometimes called a boot, a device to reduce local
stresses. It is usually an area on the outside of the grain near its aft end (and
sometimes also its forward end), where the liner material is not sticky but has a
non-adhesive coating that permits the grain to shrink away from the wall. It
allows for a reduction of the grain at the bond termination point. It moves the
location of highest stress into the liner or the insulation at the flap termination
or hinge. Normally, the liner and insulation are much stronger and tougher
than the propellant.
Parametric studies of propellant and case-bond stresses of a typical grain
case termination design (Fig. 11-24) reveal the following:
1. Flap length is less significant than the thickness of the insulation or the
separate flap boot, if one is used, in controlling the local level of stresses
at the grain-case termination.
2. The distribution of stresses at the grain-case termination is sensitive to
the local geometry; the level of stress at the case bond increases with web
fraction and length-to-diameter ratio under loading by internal pressure
and thermal shrinkage.
3. As the L/ D and web fraction increase, the inner-bore hoop stress and the
radial stress at the grain-case bond increase more rapidly than does the
Flap (unbonded length), no adhesion between liner and insulation
Bonded
length
Case
insulation
Propellant grain
*Grain liner
*Grain termination
I Star-shaped
perforation
*Head end of ~ Porlocalioo ""'
*Perforation tip
perforation
FIGURE 11-24. The asterisks in the bottom simplified diagram denote potentially
critical failure areas. The top sketch is an enlargement of the aft termination region
of the grain and shows a boot or stress relief flap.
464 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
grain-case termination stress under internal pressure and thermal shrink
age loads.
4. The radial case-bond stress level at the grain-case termination is much
larger than the case-bond shear stress under axial acceleration loading as
well as under internal pressure and thermal shrinkage loading.
Aging of propellants in rocket motors refers to their deterioration in the
physical properties with time. It is caused by the cumulative damage done to the
grain (such as by thermal cycling, and load applications) during storage, hand
ling, or transport. It can also be caused by chemical changes with time, such as
the gradual depletion (evaporation) of certain liquid plasticizers or moisture
absorption. The ability to carry stress or to allow elongation in propellants
diminishes with cumulative damage. The aging limit is the estimated time when
the motor is no longer able to perform its operation reliably or safely (see Refs.
11-28 and 11-29). Depending on the propellant and the grain design, this age
limit or motor life can be betwen 8 and 25 years. Before this limit is reached,
the motor should be deactivated and have its propellant removed and replaced.
This refurbishing of propellant is routinely done on larger and more expensive
rocket motors in the military inventory.
With small tactical rocket motors the aging limit is usually determined by
full-scale motor-firing tests at various time periods after manufacture, say 2 or
3 years and with an extrapolation to longer time periods. Accelerated tempera
ture aging (more severe thermal cycles) and accelerated mechanical pulse loads
and overstressing are often used to reduce the time needed for these tests. For
large rocket motors, which are more expensive, the number of full-scale tests
has to be relatively small, and aging criteria are then developed from structural
analysis, laboratory tests, and subscale motor tests.
Many of the early grains were cartridge loaded and kept the grain isolated
from the motor case to minimize the interrelation of the case and the grain
stresses and strains resulting from thermal expansion. Also, upon pressuriza
tion the case would expand, but the grain would shrink. The case-bonded grain
presents a far more complex problem in stress analysis. With the propellant
grain bonded firmly to the case, being a semirubbery and relatively weak
material, it is forced to respond to case strains. As a result, several critically
stressed areas exist in every case-bonded motor design; some are shown with
an asterisk in Fig. 11-24.
The varying nature of the stress analysis problem is brought about by the
physical character of propellant; in general terms, solid propellant is relatively
weak in tension and shear, is semielastic, grows softer and weaker at elevated
temperatures, becomes hard and brittle at low temperatures, readily absorbs
and stores energy upon being vibrated, degrades physically during long-term
storage because of decomposition and chemical or crystalline changes, and
accumulates structural damage under load, including cyclic load. This last
phenomenon is shown graphically in Fig. 11-25 and is particularly important
in the analysis of motors that are to have a long shelf-life (more than 10 years).
11.4. PROPELLANT GRAIN STRESS AND STRAIN 465
C
0
"iii
C
Q)
I-
"'
"'
~
ti C
0
""Cl "iii
c0C
a
~"'
C.
E
0
(..)
Failure line
100
~
-='
~
+C- ' 50
Q)
~
8:
0
Cure cooling Temperature Handling Storage Firing
cycling
FIGURE 11-25. Representation of the progress in cumulative damage to the bond
between the grain and the case in a case-bonded rocket motor experiencing a hypothe
tical stress history. (Adapted from Ref. 11-30.)
No a priori reason is known for materials to exhibit cumulative damage, but
propellants and their bond to case material exhibit this trait even under con
stant load, as shown in Fig. 11-26. Valid theories and analytical methods
applicable to cumulative damage include a consideration of both the stress
strain history and the loading path (the material effected). The most important
environmental variables affecting the shelf life of a motor are time, temperature
ro
C
"§
0
C
t+ C!- ' lQ
o Batch A
C • Batch B
0
(..)
10°
Time to failure, hr
FIGURE 11-26. Time dependent reduction of the propellant-liner-insulator bond
strength when subjected to constant load at 77°F. (From Ref. 11-31.)
466 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
cycles, propellant mass, stress (gravity forces for large motors), and shock and
vibration. Failure due to cumulative damage usually appears as cracks in the
face of the perforation or as local "unbonds" in case-bonded motors.
The strength of most propellants is sensitive to the rate of strain; in effect
they appear to become more brittle at a given temperature as the strain rate is
increased, a physical trait that is important during the ignition process.
11.5. ATTITUDE CONTROL AND SIDE MANEUVERS WITH SOLID
PROPELLANT ROCKET MOTORS
A clever attitude control (also called reaction control) system with solid pro
pellants is used on some ballistic missiles. Its hot reaction gas has a low enough
temperature so that uncooled hardware can be used for long durations.
Ammonium nitrate composite propellant (mentioned as gas generator propel
lants in Tables 12-1 and 12-2) or a propellant consisting of a nitramine (RDX
or HMX, described in Chapter 12) with a polymer binding are suitable. The
version shown schematically in Fig. 11-27 provides pitch and yaw control; hot
gas flows continuously through insulated manifolds, open hot-gas valves, and
all four nozzles. When one of these valves is closed, it causes an unbalance of
gas flow and produces a side force. To keep things simple, the four roll-control
thrusters have been deleted from this figure.
- Four nozzles, two each
for pitch and yaw control
Gas generator
with two end
burning grains
FIGURE 11-27. Simplified diagram of a rocket attitude control system using solid
propellant. All four valves are normally open and gas flows equally through all nozzles.
PROBLEMS 467
With this type of attitude control system it is possible to achieve variable
duration thrust pulsing operations and random pitch, yaw, and roll maneuvers.
It is competitive with multi-thruster liquid propellant attitude control systems.
The solid propellant versions are usually heavier, because they have heavy
insulated hardware and require more propellant (for continuous gas flow),
whereas the liquid version is operated only when attitude control motions
are required.
A similar approach with hot gas valves applies to upper stages of interceptor
vehicles used for missile defense; there is little time available for maneuvers of
the upper stage to reach the incoming missile or aircraft and therefore the
burning durations are usually short. The solid propellant gas temperatures
are higher than with gas generators (typically 1260°C or 2300°F), but lower
than with typical composite propellants (3050 Kor 5500°F), and this allows the
valves and manifolds to be made of high-temperature material (such as rhe
nium or carbon). In addition to attitude control, the system provides a sub
stantial side force or divert thrust. It displaces the flight path laterally. Figure
11-28 shows such a system. Since all hot-gas valves are normally open, a valve
has to be closed to obtain a thrust force as explained in the previous figure. The
attitude control system provides pitch, yaw, and roll control to stabilize the
vehicle during its flight, to orient the divert nozzle into the desired direction,
and sometimes to orient the seeker (at the front of the vehicle) toward the
target.
PROBLEMS
1. What is the ratio of the burning area to the nozzle area for a solid propellant motor
with these characteristics?
Propellant specific gravity 1.71
Chamber pressure 14 MPa
Burning rate 38 mm/sec
Temperature sensitivity aP 0.007 (K)-1
Specific heat ratio 1.27
Chamber gas temperature 2220 K
Molecular mass 23 kg/kg-mo!
Burning rate exponent n 0.3
2. Plot the burning rate against chamber pressure for the motor in Problem I using Eq.
11-3 between chamber pressures of 11 and 20 MPa.
3. What would the area ratio Ab! Ai in Problem I be if the pressure were increased by
10%? (Use curve from Problem 2.)
4. Design a simple rocket motor for the conditions given in Problems I and 2 for a
thrust of 5000 N and a duration of 15 sec. Determine principal dimensions and
approximate weight.
468 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
--Compartment for guidance
control, seeker and electronics
equipment
ACS grain #1
Divert grain, #1
Center of gravity
High-thrust divert nozzle
- with hot gas valve
(electr. actuator)
Divert grain, #2
ACS grain #2
Space for power supply
,...,..~:,,....."n,,1_ _ Six low-thrust ACS
nozzles
Cluster of six hot gas
valves for ACS nozzles
(pitch 2, yaw and roll 4)
FIGURE 11-28. Simplified schematic diagram of two propulsion systems for one type
of maneuverable upper stage of an interceptor missile. The side or divert forces are
relatively large and go essentially through the center of gravity (CG) of the upper stage
vehicle. To minimize the CG travel two grains are above and two grains are below the
CG. Each nozzle has its own hot gas valve, which is normally open and can be pulsed.
The attitude control system (ACS) is fed from the reaction gas of two grains and has six
small nozzles.
5. For the Orbus-6 rocket motor described in Table 11-3 determine the total impulse
to-weight ratio, the thrust-to-weight ratio, and the acceleration at start and burnout
if the vehicle inert mass and the payload come to about 6000 lbm. Use burn time
from Table 11-3 and assume g""' 32.2 ft/sec2 .
6. For a cylindrical two-dimensional grain with two slots the burning progresses in
finite time intervals approximately as shown by the successive burn surface contours
in the drawing on the next page. Draw a similar set of progressive burning surfaces
PROBLEMS 469
for any one configuration shown in Figure I 1-16 and one shown in Figure I 1-17,
and draw an approximate thrust-time curve from these plots, indicating the loca
tions where slivers will remain. Assume the propellant has a low value of n and thus
the motor experiences little change in burning rate with chamber pressure.
Slivers
7. Explain the significance of the web fraction, the volumetric loading ratio, and the
L/D ratio in terms of vehicle performance and design influence.
8. The partial differential equations I 1-4 and I 1-5 express the influence of tempera
ture on the burning of a solid propellant. Explain how a set of tests should be set up
and exactly what should be measured in order to determine these coefficients over a
range of operating conditions.
9. What would be the likely change in r, !_,, p 1, F, tb, and / 1 if the three rocket motors
described in Table I 1-3 were fired with the grain I00°F cooler than the data shown
in the table? Assume typical average temperature effects.
10. A newly designed case-bonded rocket motor with a simple end-burning grain failed
and exploded on its first test. The motor worked well for about 20% of its burn
time, when the record showed a rapid rise in chamber pressure. It was well condi
tioned at room temperature before firing and the inspection records did not show
any flaws or voids in the grain. Make a list of possible causes for this failure and
suggestions on what to do in each case to avoid a repetition of the failure.
11. Derive Eq. I 1-7. (Hint: First derive rrK by differentiating Eq. I 1-3 with respect to
temperature.) Note: This relation does not fit all the experimental data fully because
there are other variables besides n that have a mild influence. For a more complex
approach, see Ref. I 1-32.
12. What will be the percent change in nominal values of A,, r, Is, T 0, tb, Ab/A, and the
nozzle throat heat transfer rate, if the Orbus-6 rocket motor listed in Table I 1-3 is
to be downgraded in thrust for a particular flight by I 5% by substituting a new
nozzle with a larger nozzle throat area but the same nozzle exit area? The propel
lants, grain, insulation, and igniter will be the same.
470 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
13. What would be the new values of 1 1, ls, p 1, F, lb, and r for the first stage of the
Minuteman rocket motor described in Table I 1-3, if the motor were fired at sea
level with the grain temperature 20°F hotter than the data shown. Use only data
from this table.
Answers: / = 10,240,000 !bf-sec, Is = 224 sec, p = 796 psia, F = 1.99 x 105 !bf,
1 1
lb = 51.5 sec, r = 0.338 in./sec.
SYMBOLS
burning rate constant, also called temperature coefficient
solid propellant burning area, m2 (ft2 )
port area (flow area of gases inside grain cavity or between and around
propellant grains), m2 (ft2 )
nozzle throat cross-sectional area, m2 (ft2 )
web thickness, m (in.)
web fraction, or web thickness-to-radius ratio
C effective exhaust velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
c* characteristic exhaust velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
specific heat of gas, kcal/kg-K
specific heat of solid, kcal/kg-K
thrust coefficient
diameter, m (ft)
relaxation modulus, MPa (psi)
thrust, N (]bf)
average thrust, N (]bf)
acceleration due to gravity at sea level, 9.8066 m/sec2 (32.2 ft/sec2 )
mass flow rate, kg-m2 /sec
enthalpy per unit mass, J/kg or Btu/lbm
specific impulse, sec
total impulse, N-sec (]bf-sec)
specific heat ratio
ratio of burning surface to throat area, Ab! A,
length, m
m mass, kg
m
mass flow rate, kg/sec
n burning rate exponent
p pressure, MPa (lbf/in.2 )
Pi chamber pressure, MPa (lbf/in.2)
Pr Prandtl number, µ,cp/K
r propellant burning rate (velocity of consumption), m/sec or mm/sec or
in./sec
R gas constant, J/kg-K
time, sec
action time, sec
REFERENCES 471
tb burn time, sec
T absolute temperature, K(R)
v theoretical exhaust velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
2
Vb propellant volume, m3 (ft3 )
Ve chamber volume, m3 (ft3 )
v volumetric loading fraction, %
1
w total effective propellant weight, N (!bf)
we total loaded rocket weight, or gross weight, N (!bf)
w
weight rate of flow, N/sec (!bf/sec)
Greek Letters
a heat transfer factor
f3 constant
o partial derivative
E elongation or strain
K conductivity
µ, viscosity
nK temperature sensitivity coefficient of pressure, K -1(R -I)
p density, kg/m3 (lbm/ft3 )
a stress, N/cm2 (psi)
aP temperature sensitivity coefficient of burning rate, K-1(R-1 )
l; propellant mass fraction
Subscripts
b solid propellant burning conditions
p pressure or propellant or port cavity
t throat conditions
0 initial or reference condition
1 chamber condition
2 nozzle exit condition
REFERENCES
11-1. P.R. Evans, "Composite Motor Case Design," Chapter 4A; H. Badham and G.
P. Thorp, "Considerations for Designers of Cases for Small Solid Propellant
Rocket Motors," Chapter 6; B. Zeller, "Solid Propellant Grain Design,"
Chapter 8; D. I. Thrasher, "State of the Art of Solid Propellant Rocket
Motor Grain Design in the United States," Chapter 9; and A. Truchot,
"Design and Analysis of Rocket Motor Internal Insulation," Chapter IO; all
of Design Methods in Solid Propellant Rocket Motors, AGARD Lecture Series
150, Revised Version, 1988.
472 SOLID PROPELLANT ROCKET FUNDAMENTALS
11-2. N. Eisenreich, H. P. Kugler, and F. Sinn, "An Optical System for Measuring
Burning Rates of Solid Propellants," Propellants, Explosives, Pyrotechnics, Vol.
12, 1987, pp. 78-80.
11-3. N. Kubota, "Survey of Rocket Propellants and their Combustion
Characteristics," Chapter I; and M. K. Razdan and K. K. Kuo, "Erosive
Burning of Solid Propellants," Chapter 10; in K. K. Kuo and M.
Summerfield (Eds.), Fundamentals of Solid Propellant Combustion, Volume 90
in series on Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, New York, 1984, 891 pages.
11-4. S. D. Heister and R. J. Davis, "Predicting Burning Time Variations in Solid
Rocket Motors," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 8, No. 3, May-June
1992.
11-5. M. K. King, "Erosive Burning of Solid Propellants," Journal of Propulsion and
Power, Vol. 9, No. 6, November-December 1993.
11-6. J. M. Lenoir and G. Robillard, "A Mathematical Method to Predict the Effects
of Erosive Burning in Solid-propellant Rocket," Sixth Symposium
(International) on Combustion, Reinhold, New York, 1957, pp. 663-667.
11-7. "Solid Propellant Selection and Characterization," NASA SP-8064, June 19971
(N72-13737).
11-8. M. S. Fuchs, A. Peretz, and Y. M. Timnat, "Parametric Study of Acceleration
Effects on Burning Rates of Metallized Solid Propellants," Journal of Spacecraft
and Rockets, Vol. 19, No. 6, November-December 1982, pp. 539-544.
11-9. K. K. Kuo, J. Moreci, and J. Mantzaras, "Modes of Crack Formation in
Burning Solid Propellant," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 3, No. I,
January-February 1987, pp. 19-25.
11-10. M. T. Langhenry, "The Direct Effects of Strain on Burning Rates of Solid
Propellants," A/AA Paper 84-1436, June 1984.
11-11. M. K. King, "Analytical Modeling of Effects of Wires on Solid Motor
Ballistics," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 7, No. 3, May-June 1991,
pp. 312-320.
11-12. "Solid Rocket Motor Performance Analysis and Prediction," NASA SP-8039,
May 1971 (N72-18785).
11-13. E. M. Landsbaum, M. P. Salinas, and J.P. Leavy, "Specific Impulse Predictions
of Solid Propellant Motors," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 17, 1980,
pp. 400-406.
11-14. R. Akiba and M. Kohno, "Experiments with Solid Rocket Technology in the
Development of M-3SII," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 13, No. 6-7, 1986, pp. 349-
361.
11-15. P.R. Zarda and D. J. Hartman, "Computer-Aided Propulsion Burn Analysis,"
A/AA Paper 88-3342, July 1988 (cavity geometry).
11-16. R. J. Hejl and S. D. Heister, "Solid Rocket Motor Grain Burnback Analysis
Using Adaptive Grids," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 11, No. 5,
September-October 1995.
11-17. W. H. Jolley, J. F. Hooper, P. R. Holton, and W. A. Bradfield, "Studies on
Coning in End-Burning Rocket Motors," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol.
2, No. 2, May-June 1986, pp. 223-227.
REFERENCES 473
11-18. S. Nishi, K. Fukuda, and N. Kubota, "Combustion Tests of Two-Stage Pulse
Rocket Motors," A/AA Paper 89-2426, July 1989, 5 pages.
11-19. L. C. Carrier, T. Constantinou, P. G. Harris, and D. L. Smith, "Dual
Interrupted Thrust Pulse Motor," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 3,
No. 4, July-August 1987, pp. 308-312.
11-20. C. Bruno et al., "Experimental and Theoretical Burning of Rocket Propellant
near the Pressure Deflagration Limit," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 12, No. 5, 1985,
pp. 351-360.
11-21. F. N. Kelley, "Solid Propellant Mechanical Property Testing, Failure Criteria
and Aging," Chapter 8 in C. Boyars and K. Klager (Eds.), Propellant
Manufacture Hazards and Testing, Advances in Chemistry Series 88,
American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1969.
11-22. T. L. Kuhlmann, R. L. Peeters, K. W. Bills, and D. D. Scheer, "Modified
Maximum Principal Stress Criterion for Propellant Liner Bond Failures,"
Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 3, No. 3, May-June 1987.
11-23. R. W. Magness and J. W. Gassaway, "Development of a High Performance
Rocket Motor for the Tactical VT-I Missile," A/AA Paper 88-3325, July 1988.
11-24. I-Shih Chang and M. J. Adams, "Three-Dimensional, Adaptive, Unstructured,
Mesh Generation for Solid-Propellant Stress Analysis," A/AA Paper 96-3256,
July 1996.
11-25. W. A. Cook, "Three-Dimensional Grain Stress Analysis Using the Finite
Element Method," AFRPL Report TT-71-51, Thiokol Corp., April 1971
(AD725043).
11-26. G. Meili, G. Dubroca, M. Pasquier, and J. Thenpenier, "Nonlinear Viscoelastic
Design of Case-Bonded Composite Modified Double Base Grains," A/AA
Paper 80-l 177R, July 1980, and S. Y. Ho and G. Care, "Modified Fracture
Mechanics Approach in Structural Analysis of Solid-Rocket Motors," Journal
of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 14, No. 4, July-August 1998.
11-27. P. G. Butts and R. N. Hammond, "IUS Propellant Development and
Qualification," Paper presented at the 1983 JANNAF Propulsion Meeting,
Monterey, February 1983, 13 pages.
11-28. A. G. Christianson et al., "HTPB Propellant Aging," Journal of Spacecraft and
Rockets, Vol. 18, No. 3, May-June 1983.
11-29. D. I. Thrasher and J. H. Hildreth, "Structural Service Life Estimates for a
Reduced Smoke Rocket Motor," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 19,
No. 6, November 1982, pp. 564-570.
11-30. S. W. Tsa (Ed.), Introduction to Viscoelasticity, Technomic Publishing Co.,
Stanford, CT, Conn., 1968.
11-31. J. D. Ferry, Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers, John Wiley & Sons, New York,
1970.
11-32. R. E. Hamke, M. T. Gaunce, and J. R. Osborn, "The Effect of Pressure
Exponent on Temperature Sensitivity," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 15, Nos. 6
and 7, 1987, pp. 377-382.
CHAPTER 12
SOLID PROPELLANTS
In this chapter we describe several common solid rocket propellants, their
principal categories, ingredients, hazards, manufacturing processes, and qual
ity control. We also discuss liners and insulators, propellants for igniters,
tailoring of propellants, and propellants for gas generators. It is the second
of four chapters dealing with solid propellant rocket motors.
Thermochemical analyses are needed to characterize the performance of a
given propellant. The analysis methods are described in Chapter 5. Such ana
lyses provide theoretical values of average molecular weight, combustion tem
perature, average specific heat ratio, and the characteristic velocity; they are
functions of the propellant composition and chamber pressure. A specific
impulse can also be computed for a particular nozzle configuration.
The term solid propellant has several connotations, including: (I) the rub
bery or plastic-like mixture of oxidizer, fuel, and other ingredients that have
been processed and constitute the finished grain; (2) the processed but uncured
product; (3) a single ingredient, such as the fuel or the oxidizer. Acronyms and
chemical symbols are used indiscriminately as abbreviations for propellant and
ingredient names; only some of these will be used here.
12.1. CLASSIFICATION
Processed modern propellants can be classified in several ways, as described
below. This classification is not rigorous or complete. Sometimes the same
propellant will fit into two or more of the classifications.
474
12.1. CLASSIFICATION 475
1. Propellants are often tailored to and classified by specific applications,
such as space launch booster propellants or tactical missile propellants;
each has somewhat specific chemical ingredients, different burning rates,
different physical properties, and different performance. Table 11-1
shows four kinds of rocket motor applications (e ach has somewhat dif
ferent propellants) and several gas generator applications. Propellants for
rocket motors have hot (over 2400 K) gases and are used to produce
thrust, but gas generator propellants have lower-temperature combustion
gases (800 to 1200 K) and they are used to produce power, not thrust.
Historically, the early rocket motor propellants used to be grouped
into two classes: double-base (DB*) propellants were used as the first
production propellants, and then the development of polymers as binders
made the composite propellants feasible.
2. Double-base (DB) propellants form a homogeneous propellant grain,
usually a nitrocellulose (NC*), a solid ingredient which absorbs liquid
nitroglycerine (NG) plus minor percentages of additives. Both the major
ingredients are explosives and function as a combined fuel and oxidizer.
Both extruded double-base (EDB) and cast double-base (CDB) propellant
have found extensive applications, mostly in small tactical missiles of
older design. By adding crystalline nitramines (HMX or RDX)* the
performance and density can be improved; this is sometimes called
cast-modified double-base propellant. A further improvement is to add
an elastomeric binder (rubber-like, such as crosslinked polybutadiene),
which improves the physical properties and allows more nitramine and
thus improves the performance slightly. The resulting propellant is called
elastomeric-modified cast double-base (EMCDB). These four classes of
double base have nearly smokeless exhausts. Adding some solid ammo
nium perchlorate (AP) and aluminum (Al) increases the density and the
specific impulse slightly, but the exhaust gas is smoky. The propellant is
called composite-modified double-base propellant or CMDB.
3. Composite propellants form a heterogeneous propellant grain with the
oxidizer crystals and a powdered fuel (usually aluminum) held together
in a matrix of synthetic rubber (or plastic) binder, such as polybutadiene
(HTPB)*. Composite propellants are cast from a mix of solid (AP crys
tals, Al powder)* and liquid (HTPB, PPG)* ingredients. The propellant is
hardened by crosslinking or curing the liquid binder polymer with a small
amount of curing agent, and curing it in an oven, where it becomes hard
and solid. In the past three decades the composite propellants have been
the most commonly used class. They can be further subdivided:
(1) Conventional composite propellants usually contain between 60 and
72% ammonium perchlorate (AP) as crystalline oxidizer, up to 22%
*A cronyms, symbols, abbreviations, and chemical names of propellant ingredients are explained in
Tables 12-6 and 12-7 in Section 12.4.
476 SOLID PROPELLANTS
aluminum powder (Al) as a metal fuel, and 8 to 16% of elastomeric
binder (organic polymer) including its plasticizer.
(2) Modified composite propellant where an energetic nitramine (HMX
or RDX) is added for obtaining a little more performance and also a
somewhat higher density.
(3) Modified composite propellant where an energetic plasticizer such as
nitroglycerine (used in double-base propellant) is added to give a little
more performance. Sometimes HMX is also added.
(4) A high-energy composite solid propellant (with some aluminum),
where the organic elastomeric binder and plasticizer are largely
replaced by energetic materials (such as certain explosives) and
where some of the AP is replaced by HMX. Some of these are called
elastomer-modified cast double-base propellants (EMCDB). Most
are experimental propellants. The theoretical specific impulse can
be between 270 and 275 sec at standard conditions.
(5) A lower-energy composite propellant, where ammonium nitrate (AN) is
the crystalline oxidizer (no AP). It is used for gas generator propel
lant. If a large amount of HMX is added, it can become a minimum
smoke propellant with fair performance.
Figures 12-1 and 12-2 show the general regions for the specific impulse,
burning rate, and density for the more common classes of propellants.
Composite propellants give higher densities, specific impulse, and a wider
range of burning rates. The ordinate in these figures is an actual or esti
mated specific impulse at standard conditions (1000 psi and expansion to
sea-level atmosphere). It does not include any pressure drops in the cham
ber, any nozzle erosion, or an assumption about combustion losses and
scaling. The composite propellants are shown to have a wide range of
burning rates and densities; most of them have specific gravities between
1.75 and 1.81 and burning rates between 7 and 20 mm/sec. Table 12-1 lists
performance characteristics for several propellants. The double-base (DB)
propellants and the ammonium nitrate (AN) propellants have lower per
formance and density. Most composite propellants have almost the same
performance and density but a wide range of burning rates. The highest
performance is for a CMDB propellant whose ingredients are identified as
DB/AP-HMX/Al, but it is only four percent higher.
Several of the classifications can be confusing. The term composite
modified double-base propellant (CMDB) has been used for (I) a DB
propellant, where some AP, Al, and binder are added; (2) alternatively,
the same propellant could be classified as a composite propellant to
which some double-base ingredients have been added.
4. Propellants can be classified by the density of the smoke in the exhaust
plume as smoky, reduced smoke, or minimum smoke (essentially smoke-
12.1. CLASSIFICATION 477
High energy
250 ~
Composites (AP Al
R ' , polymer)
educed sm k
~ ~ e (EMcoB + AP)
240
/ __________ '.""'__e_auc...::..:_edd "s""mo-ke
- - composit
.,.. - EMCDB es (No Al)
,;
C C(. l l) ) ) 230 / /,,,.....--...._ ............... ' '
/
~ I ',
~
~Q: ": ',
220 /
I I CMDB + HMX ,...,,,,..,,,'
, .
.)-----
....... '\
I ----;;,,...--, I
I ,,.---..- ,,,, I I
I / COB ,, I EDB 1
/ / I I
210 I' / // I /
I / // I // --- Aluminized
\, , I / ,,/ /
I I // ,,,, ,, // Min. smoke
(, ..._ ____ __ / --- Reduced smoke
200 \\ .,,,,..,..
\_ ---- --=-----/:;/r" -----
10 20 30 40 50 60
Burning rate (mm/sec)
FIGURE 12-1. Estimated actual specific impulse and burning rate for several solid
propellant categories. (Adapted and reproduced from Ref. 12-1 with permission of
the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics [AIAA].)
less). Aluminum powder, a desirable fuel ingredient, is oxidized to alu
minum oxide, which forms visible small solid smoke particles in the
exhaust gas. Most composite propellants are smoky. By reducing the
aluminum content in composite propellant, the amount of smoke is
also reduced. Carbon (soot) particles and metal oxides, such as zirconium
oxide or iron oxide, can also be visible if in high enough concentration.
This is further discussed in Chapter 18.
5. The safety rating for detonation can distinguish propellants as a poten
tially detonable material (class I. 1) or as a nondetonable material (class
1.3), as described in Section 11.3. Examples of class 1.1 propellant are a
number of double-base propellants and composite propellants containing
a significant portion of solid explosive (e.g., HMX or RDX), together
with certain other ingredients.
6. Propellants can be classified by some of the principal manufacturing
processes that are used. Cast propellant is made by mechanical mixing
of solid and liquid ingredients, followed by casting and curing; it is the
most common process for composite propellants. Curing of many cast
478 SOLID PROPELLANTS
Is <1
7
(sec) 0
'too
230
I
I
1 1
220~~~~----'<-'-~~~~-----'-~~~---'-----'-~~~~~~~~~~~~--
1 .60 1 .65 1 .7 0 1.75 1.80 1.85
Density (g/cm3 )
FIGURE 12-2. Estimated actual specific impulse and specific gravity for several solid
propellant categories. (Adapted and reproduced from Ref. 12-1 with permission of the
AIAA.)
propellants is by chemical reaction between binder and curing agent at
elevated temperature (45 to 150°C); however, there are some that can be
cured at ambient temperatures (20 to 25°C) or hardened by a nonchemi
cal process such as crystallization. Propellant can also be made by a
salvation process (d issolving a plasticizer in a solid pelletized matrix,
whose volume is expanded). Extruded propellant is made by mechanical
mixing (rolling into sheets) followed by extrusion (pushing through a die
at high pressure). Solvation and extrusion processes apply primarily to
double-base propellants.
7. Propellants have also been classified by their principal ingredient, such as
the principal oxidizer (ammonium perchlorate propellants, ammonium
nitrate propellants, or azide-type propellants) or their principal binder or
fuel ingredient, such as polybutadiene propellants or aluminized propel
lants. This classification of propellants by ingredients is described in
Section 12.4 and Table 12-8.
8. Propellants with toxic and nontoxic exhaust gases. This is discussed in
more detail in Section 12.3.
TABLE 12-1. Characteristics of Some Operational Solid Propellants
Flame Density or
1., Temperature' Spec. Gravity' Metal Burning Pressure Stress (psi)/Strain (%)
Propellant Typea Range Content Rate"·e Exponente Hazard Processing
(sec)" (OF) (OK) (lb/in3 ) (sp. gr.) (wt%) (in./sec) n Classificationd -60°F + 150°F Method
DB 220-230 4100 2550 0.058 l.61 0 0.05-1.2 0.30 I.I 4600/2 490/60 Extruded
DB/AP/Al 260-265 6500 3880 0.065 l.80 20-21 0.2-1.0 0.40 1.3 2750/5 120/50 Extruded
DB/AP-HMX/Al 265-270 6700 4000 0.065 l.80 20 0.2-1.2 0.49 I.I 2375/3 50/33 Solvent cast
PVC/AP/Al 260-265 5600 3380 0.064 l.78 21 0.3--0.9 0.35 1.3 369/150 38/220 Cast or
extruded
PU/AP/Al 260-265 5700 3440 0.064 l.78 16-20 0.2-0.9 0.15 1.3 1170/6 75/33 Cast
PBAN/AP/Al 260-263 5800 3500 0.064 l.78 16 0.25-1.0 0.33 1.3 520/16 71/28 Cast
(at -I0°F)
CTPB/AP/Al 260-265 5700 3440 0.064 l.78 15-17 0.25-2.0 0.40 1.3 325/26 88/75 Cast
HTPB/AP/Al 260-265 5700 3440 0.067 l.86 4-17 0.25-3.0 0.40 1.3 910/50 90/33 Cast
PBAA/AP/Al 260-265 5700 3440 0.064 l.78 14 0.25-1.3 0.35 1.3 500/13 41/31 Cast
AN/Polymer 180-190 2300 1550 0.053 1.47 0 0.06--0.5 0.60 1.3 200/5 NA Cast
"Al, aluminum; AN, ammonium nitrate; AP, ammonium perchlorate; CTPB, carboxy-terminated polybutadiene; DB, double-base; HMX, cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine; HTPB, hydroxyl-terminatd poly
butadiene; PBAA, polybutadiene-acrylic acid polymer; PBAN, polybutadiene-acrylic acid-acrylonitrile terpolymer; PU, polyurethane; PVC, polyvinyl chloride.
h At 1000 psia expanding to 14.7 psia, ideal or theoretical value at reference conditions.
' At 1000 psia.
,1 See page 491.
e /_1 flame temperature, density, burn rate and pressure exponent will vary slightly with specific composition.
480 SOLID PROPELLANTS
A large variety of different chemical ingredients and propellant formulations
have been synthesized, analyzed, and tested in experimental motors. Later we
list many of them. Perhaps only 12 basic types of propellant are in common use
today. Other types are still being investigated. Table 12-2 evaluates some of the
advantages and disadvantages of several selected propellant classes. A typical
propellant has between 4 and 12 different ingredients. Representative formula
tions for three types of propellant are given in Table 12-3. In actual practice,
each manufacturer of a propellant has his own precise formulation and proces
sing procedure. The exact percentages of ingredients, even for a given propel
lant such as PBAN, not only vary among manufacturers but often vary from
motor application to motor application. The practice of adjusting the mass
percentage and even adding or deleting one or more of the minor ingredients
(additives) is known as propellant tailoring. Tailoring is the practice of taking a
well-known propellant and changing it slightly to fit a new application, differ
ent processing equipment, altered motor ballistics, storage life, temperature
limits, or even a change in ingredient source.
New propellant formulations are normally developed using laboratory-size
mixers, curing ovens, and related apparatus with the propellant mixers (1 to 5
liters) operated by remote control for safety reasons. Process studies usually
accompany the development of the formulation to evaluate the "processibility"
of a new propellant and to guide the design of any special production equip
ment needed in preparing ingredients, mixing, casting, or curing the propellant.
Historically, black powder (a pressed mixture of potassium nitrate, sulfur,
and an organic fuel such as ground peach stones) was the first to be used. Other
types of ingredients and propellants have been used in experimental motors,
including fluorine compounds, propellants containing powdered beryllium,
boron, hydrides of boron, lithium, or beryllium, or new synthetic organic
plasticizer and binder materials with azide or nitrate groups. Most have not
yet been considered satisfactory or practical for production in rocket motors.
12.2. PROPELLANT CHARACTERISTICS
The propellant selection is critical to rocket motor design. The desirable pro
pellant characteristics are listed below and are discussed again in other parts of
this book. The requirements for any particular motor will influence the prio
rities of these characteristics:
1. High performance or high specific impulse; really this means high gas
temperature and/or low molecular mass.
2. Predictable, reproducible, and initially adjustable burning rate to fit the
need of the grain design and the thrust-time requirement.
3. For minimum variation in thrust or chamber pressure, the pressure or
burning rate exponent and the temperature coefficient should be small.
12.2. PROPELLANT CHARACTERISTICS 481
4. Adequate physical properties (including bond strength) over the
intended operating temperature range.
5. High density (allows a small-volume motor).
6. Predictable, reproducible ignition qualities (such as reasonable ignition
overpressure)
7. Good aging characteristics and long life. Aging and life predictions
depend on the propellant's chemical and physical properties, the cumu
lative damage criteria with load cycling and thermal cycling (see page
461), and actual tests on propellant samples and test data from failed
motors.
8. Low absorption of moisture, which often causes chemical deterioration.
9. Simple, reproducible, safe, low-cost, controllable, and low-hazard man
ufacturing.
10. Guaranteed availability of all raw materials and purchased components
over the production and operating life of the propellant, and good
control over undesirable impurities.
11. Low technical risk, such as a favorable history of prior applications.
12. Relative insensitivity to certain energy stimuli described in the next sec
tion.
13. Non-toxic exhaust gases.
14. Not prone to combustion instability (see next chapter).
Some of these desirable characteristics will apply also to all materials and
purchased components used in solid motors, such as the igniter, insulator, case,
or safe and arm device. Several of these characteristics are sometimes in conflict
with each other. For example, increasing the physical strength (more binder
and or more crosslinker) will reduce the performance and density. So a mod
ification of the propellant for one of these characteristics can often cause
changes in several of the others.
Several illustrations will now be given on how the characteristics of a
propellant change when the concentration of one of its major ingredients is
changed. For composition propellants using a polymer binder [hydroxyl-ter
minated polybutadiene (HTPB)] and various crystalline oxidizers, Fig. 12-3
shows the calculated variation in combustion or flame temperature, average
product gas molecular weight, and specific impulse as a function of oxidizer
concentration; this is calculated data taken from Ref. 12-2, based on a
thermochemical analysis as explained in Chapter 5. The maximum values
of ls and T occur at approximately the same concentration of oxidizer. In
1
practice the optimum percentage for AP (about 90 to 93%) and AN (about
93%) cannot be achieved, because concentrations greater than about 90%
total solids (including the aluminum and solid catalysts) cannot be processed
in a mixer. A castable slurry that will flow into a mold requires 10 to 15%
liquid content.
.i::,. TABL-E 12-2. Characteristics of Selected Propellants
CX)
I\)
Propellant Type Advantages Disadvantages
Double-base Modest cost; nontoxic clean exhaust, smokeless; good burn rate Free-standing grain requires structural support; low
(extruded) control; wide range of burn rates; simple performance, low density; high to intermediate
well-known process; good mechanical properties; low hazard in manufacture; can have storage
temperature coefficient; very low pressure exponent; plateau problems with NG bleeding out; diameter limited
burning is possible by available extrusion presses; class 1.1
Double-base Wide range of burn rates; nontoxic smokeless exhaust; relatively NG may bleed out or migrate; high to intermediate
(castable) safe to handle; simple, well-known process; modest cost; good manufacture hazard; low performance; low
mechanical properties; good burn rate control; low temperature density; higher cost than extruded DB; class I. I
coefficient; plateau burning can be achieved
Composite-modified double-base or Higher performance; good mechanical properties; high density Storage stability can be marginal; complex facilities;
CMDB with some AP and Al (sp. gr. 1.83-1.86); less likely to have combustion stability some smoke in exhaust; high flame temperature;
problems; intermediate cost; good background experience moisture sensitive; moderately toxic exhaust;
hazards in manufacture; modest ambient
temperature range; the value of n is high (0.8 to
0.9); moderately high temperature coefficient
Composite AP, Al, and PBAN or Reliable; high density; long experience background; modest cost; Modest ambient temperature range; high viscosity
PU or CTPB binder good aging; long cure time; good performance; usually stable limits at maximum solid loading; high flame
combustion; low to medium cost; wide temperature range; high temperature; toxic, smoky exhaust; some are
density; low to moderate temperature sensitivity; good burn moisture sensitive; some burn-rate modifiers (e.g.
rate control; usually good physical properties; class 1.3 aziridines) are carcinogens
Composite AP, Al, and HTPB Slightly better solids loading % and performance than PBAN or Complex facilities; moisture sensitive; fairly high
binder; most common composite CTPB; widest ambient temperature limits; good burn-rate flame temperature; toxic, smoky exhaust
propellant today control; usually stable combustion; medium cost; good storage
stability; widest range of burn rates; good physical properties;
good experience; class 1.3
Modified composite AP, Al, PB Higher performance; good burn-rate control; usually stable Expensive, complex facilities; hazardous processing;
binder plus some HMX or RDX combustion; high density; moderate temperature sensitivity; can harder-to-control burn rate; high flame
have good mechanical properties temperature; toxic, smoky exhaust; can be impact
sensitive; can be class I. I; high cost; pressure
exponent 0.5--0. 7
Composite with energetic binder Highest performance; high density Expensive; limited experience; impact sensitive; high
and plasticizer (1.8 to 1.86); narrow range of burn rates pressure exponent
such as NG, AP, HMX
Modified double- Higher performance; high density Same as CMDB above; limited experience; most are
base with HMX (I. 78 to 1.88); stable combustion; narrow range of burn rates class 1.1; high cost
Modified AN propellant with Fair performance; relatively clean; smokeless; nontoxic exhaust Relatively little experience; can be hazardous to
HMX or RDX added manufacture; need to stabilize AN to limit grain
growth; low burn rates; impact sensitive; medium
density; class 1.1 or 1.3
Ammonium nitrate plus polymer Clean exhaust; little smoke; essentially nontoxic exhaust; low Low performance; low density; need to stabilize AN
binder (gas generator) temperature gas; usually stable combustion; modest cost; low to limit grain growth and avoid phase
pressure exponent transformations; moisture sensitive; low burn
rates
RDX/HMX with polymer Low smoke; nontoxic exhaust; lower combustion temperature Low performance; low density; class I. I
484 SOLID PROPELLANTS
TABLE 12-3. Representative Propellant Formulations
Double-Base Composite Composite Double-Base
(JPN Propellant) (PBAN Propellant) (CMDB Propellant)
Ingredient Wt% Ingredient Wt% Ingredient Wt%
Nitrocellulose 51.5 Ammonium 70.0 Ammonium 20.4
perchlorate perchlorate
Nitroglycerine 43.0 Aluminum powder 16.0 Aluminum powder 21.1
Diethyl phthalate 3.2 Polybutadiene- 11.78 Nitrocellulose 21.9
acrylic acid-
acrylonitrile
Ethyl centralite 1.0 Epoxy curative 2.22 Nitroglycerine 29.0
Potassium sulfate 1.2 Triacetin 5.1
Carbon black <!% Stabilizers 2.5
Candelilla wax <!%
Source: Courtesy of Air Force Phillips Laboratory, Edwards, California.
A typical composition diagram for a composite propellant is shown in Fig.
12--4. It shows how the specific impulse varies with changes in the composition
of the three principal ingredients: the solid AP, solid Al, and viscoelastic poly
mer binder.
For double-base (DB) propellant the theoretical variations of Is and T are
1
shown in Figs. 12-1 and 12-5 as a function of the nitroglycerine (NG) or
plasticizer percentage. The theoretical maximum specific impulse occurs at
about 80% NG. In practice, nitroglycerine, which is a liquid, is seldom
found in concentrations over 60%, because the physical properties are poor
if NG is high. There need to be other major solid or soluble ingredients to make
a usable DB propellant.
For CMDB propellant the addition of either AP or a reactive nitramine
such as RDX allows a higher Is than ordinary DB (where AP or RDX percent
is zero), as shown in Fig. 12-6. Both AP and RDX greatly increase the flame
temperature and make heat transfer more critical. The maximum values of I,
occur at about 50% AP and at 100% RDX (which is an impractical propellant
that cannot be manufactured and will not have reasonable physical properties).
At high concentrations of AP or RDX the exhaust gases contain considerable
H 0 and 0 (as shown in Fig. 12-7); these enhance the erosion rate of carbon
2 2
containing insulators or nozzle materials. The toxic HCl is present in concen
trations between 10 and 20%, but for practical propellants it seldom exceeds
14%.
Nitramines such as RDX or HMX contain relatively few oxidizing radicals,
and the binder surrounding the nitramine crystals cannot be fully oxidized. The
binder is decomposed at the combustion temperature, forms gases rich in
hydrogen and carbon monoxide (which reduces the molecular weight), and
12.2. PROPELLANT CHARACTERISTICS 485
RDX
HMX
u
Q)
</)
ai
.'!'.
:::,
EQ. 200
u
.::
u
Q)
Q.
(/)
K;---\
100 ...... __.~--'-~...L..~-'-~-'----'~--'-~~
60 70 80 90 100
Oxidizer concentration, %
40QQ.--.---,~-.---,~.....-----.~-.---,
60
RDX 0
E
"'3000 6, 50
~- .:<:
OJ
..3 .:<:
QQ~ ) . (( f/ )) 40
E Cll
2l E
Q) 1§
E :::,
.!'? 2000 0 30
LL. QJ
0
~
20
HMX
lOOOL-....i...---1~....i...---1~....___.~....___. 10
60 70 80 90 100 60 70 80 90 100
Oxidizer concentration, % Oxidizer concentration,%
FIGURE 12-3. Variation of combustion temperature, average molecular mass of the
combustion gases, and theoretical specific impulse (at frozen equilibrium) as a function
of oxidizer concentration for HTPB-based composite propellants. Data are for a cham
ber pressure of 68 atm and nozzle exit pressure of 1.0 atm. (Reproduced from Ref. 12-2
with permission of the AIAA.)
486 SOLID PROPELLANTS
Binder:
polyester-PU-
FIGURE 12-4. Composition diagram of calculated specific impulse for an ammonium
perchlorate-aluminum-polyurethane (PU is a polyester binder) at standard conditions
(1000 psi and expansion to 14.7 psi). The maximum value of specific impulse occurs at
about 11 % PU, 72% AP, and 17% Al. (Reproduced from Ref. 12-3 with permission of
the American Chemical Society.)
300 3400
280 3000
u
"Cl') >:..
~ ~
ai 260 2600 i
21 .3
:::,
0. ~
.~ 0Cl).
u E
~ u 240 2200 .2l
2i. ECl)
if) u"::':
220 1800
12.6 N% NC
200 1400
0 20 40 60 80 100
NG concentration, %
FIGURE 12-5. Specific impulse and flame temperature versus nitroglycerine (NG) con
centration of double-base propellants. (Reproduced from Ref. 12-2 with permission of
the AIAA.)
12.3. HAZARDS 487
300 3400
.,.-......_Ti
'
280 3000
/ /
/
"u (1') / ., .. :: ;: "
/
~ .,; 260 / 2600 i
:" :i' / . "3 '
a. \ ai
_§ / ' Q.
(~u a(u /1 ) ) . 240 ' \ \ \ \ \ 2200 2 LE E "< il : ') :
\ \
220 \ \ 1800
--- AP-CMDB \ \
--- RDX-CMDB \ \
200 1400
0 50 100
AP or RDX concentration, %
FIGURE 12--6. Specific impulse and flame temperature versus AP or RDX concentra
tion of AP-CMDB propellants. (Reproduced from Ref. 12-2 with permission of the
AIAA.)
cools the gases to a lower combustion temperature. The exhaust gases of AP
based and RDX-based CMDB propellant are shown in Fig. 12-7. The solid
carbon particles seem to disappear if the RDX content is high.
12.3. HAZARDS
With proper precautions and equipment, all common propellants can be man
ufactured, handled, and fired safely. It is necessary to fully understand the
hazards and the methods for preventing hazardous situations from arising.
Each material has its own set of hazards; some of the more common ones
are described briefly below and also in Refs. 12-4 and 12-5. Not all apply to
each propellant.
Inadvertent Ignition
If a rocket motor is ignited and starts combustion when it is not expected to do
so, the consequences can include very hot gases, local fires, or ignition of
adjacent rocket motors. Unless the motor is constrained or fastened down,
its thrust will suddenly accelerate it to unanticipated high velocities or erratic
flight paths that can cause damage. Its exhaust cloud can be toxic and corro
sive. Inadvertent ignition can be caused by these effects:
488 SOLID PROPELLANTS
50 p = 70 aim
H20
#. 40
c
0
:.::;
u 30
~
<l)
0
:;;;; 20
10
70 80 90 100
AP concentration, %
50 p = 70 aim
co
40
~
c:
:0e
30
.";:'
<l)
0
:;;;; 20
10
70 80 90 100
RDX concentration, %
FIGURE 12-7. Calculated combustion products of composite propellant with varying
amounts of AP or RDX. (Adapted from Chapter I of Ref. 12-2 with permission of the
AIAA.)
Stray or induced currents activate the igniter.
Electrostatic discharge causes a spark or arc discharge.
Fires cause excessive heating of motor exterior, which can raise the propel
lant temperature above the ignition point.
Impact (bullet penetration, or dropping the motor onto a hard surface).
Energy absorption from prolonged mechanical vibration can cause the pro
pellant to overheat.
An electromechanical system is usually provided that prevents stray currents
from activating the igniter; it is called safe and arm system. It prevents ignition
induced by currents in other wires of the vehicle, radar- or radio-frequency
induced currents, electromagnetic surges, or pulses from a nuclear bomb explo
sion. It prevents electric currents from reaching the igniter circuit during its
12.3. HAZARDS 489
"unarmed" condition. When put into the "arm" position, it is ready to accept
and transmit the start signal to the igniter.
Electrostatic discharges (ESD) can be caused by lightning, friction of insu
lating materials, or the moving separation of two insulators. The buildup of a
high electrostatic potential of thousands of volts can, upon discharge, allow a
rapid increase in electric current, which in turn can lead to arcing or exothermic
reactions along the current's path. For this reason all propellants, liners, or
insulators should have sufficient electric conductivity to prevent the buildup of
an electrostatic charge. The inadvertent ignition of a Pershing ground-to
ground missile is believed to have been caused by electrostatic discharge
while in the transporter-erector vehicle. ESD is a function of the materials,
their surface and volume resistivities, dielectric constants, and the breakdown
voltages.
Viscoelastic propellants are excellent absorbers of vibration energy and can
become locally hot when oscillated for extensive periods at particular frequen
cies. This can happen in designs where a segment of the grain is not well
supported and is free to vibrate at natural frequencies. A propellant can also
be accidentally ignited by various other energy inputs, such as mechanical
friction or vibration. Standard tests have been developed to measure the pro
pellant's resistance to these energy inputs.
Aging and Useful Life
This topic was discussed briefly in the section on Structural Design in the
previous chapter. The aging of a propellant can be measured with test motors
and propellant sample tests if the loading during the life of the motor can be
correctly anticipated. It is then possible to estimate and predict the useful shelf
or storage life of a rocket motor (see Refs. 12-5 and 12-6). When a reduction in
physical properties, caused by estimated thermal or mechanical load cycles
(cumulative damage), has reduced the safety margin on the stresses and/or
strains to a danger point, the motor is no longer considered to be safe to ignite
and operate. Once this age limit or its predicted, weakened condition is
reached, the motor has a high probability of failure. It needs to be pulled
from the ready inventory, and the old aged propellant needs to be removed
and replaced with new, strong propellant.
The life of a particular motor depends on the particular propellant, the
frequency and magnitude of imposed loads or strains, the design, and other
factors. Typical life values range from 5 to 25 years. Shelf life can usually be
increased by increasing the physical strength of the propellants (e.g., by
increasing the amount of binder), selecting chemically compatible, stable ingre
dients with minimal long-term degradation, or by minimizing the vibration
loads, temperature limits, or number of cycles (controlled storage and trans
port environment).
490 SOLID PROPELLANTS
Case Overpressure and Failure
The motor case will break or explode if the chamber pressure exceeds the case's
burst pressure. The release of high-pressure gas energy can cause an explosion;
motor pieces could be thrown out into the adjacent area. The sudden depres
surization from chamber pressure to ambient pressure, which is usually below
the deflagration limit, would normally cause a class 1.3 propellant to stop
burning. Large pieces of unburned propellant can often be found after a violent
case burst. This type of motor failure can be caused by one of the following
phenomena:
I. The grain is overaged, porous, or severely cracked and/or has major
unbonded areas due to severe accumulated damage.
2. There has been a significant chemical change in the propellant due to
migration or slow, low-order chemical reactions. This can reduce the
allowable physical properties, weakening the grain, so that it will crack
or cause unfavorable increases in the burning rate. In some cases chemi
cal reactions create gaseous products which create many small voids and
raise the pressure in sealed stored motors.
3. The motor is not properly manufactured. Obviously, careful fabrication
and inspection are necessary.
4. The motor has been damaged. For example, a nick or dent in the case
caused by improper handling will reduce the case strength. This can be
prevented by careful handling and repeated inspections.
5. An obstruction plugs the nozzle (e.g., a loose large piece of insulation)
and causes a rapid increase in chamber pressure.
6. Moisture absorption can degrade the strength and strain capabilities by a
factor of 3 to 10 in propellants that contain hygroscopic ingredients.
Motors are usually sealed to prevent humid air access.
Detonation versus Def/agration. When burning rocket motor propellant is
overpressurized, it can either deflagrate (or burn) or detonate (explode vio
lently), as described in Table 12-4. In a detonation the chemical reaction en
ergy of the whole grain can be released in a very short time (microseconds), and
in effect it becomes an explosive bomb. This detonation condition can happen
with some propellants and some ingredients (e .. g, nitroglycerine or HMX,
which are described later in this chapter). Detonations can be minimized or
avoided by proper design, correct manufacture, and safe handling and operat
ing procedures.
The same material may burn or detonate, depending on the chemical for
mulation, the type and intensity of the initiation, the degree of confinement, the
physical propellant properties (such as density or porosity), and the geometric
characteristics of the motor. It is possible for certain propellants to change
suddenly from an orderly deflagration to a detonation. A simplified explana
tion of this transition starts with normal burning at rated chamber pressure;
12.3. HAZARDS 491
TABLE 12-4. Comparison of Burning and Detonation
Burning
Explosive
Characteristic With Air Within Rocket Motors Detonation
Typical material Coal and air Propellant, no air Rocket propellant or
explosives
Common means of Heat Heat Shock wave; sudden
initiating reaction pressure rise plus heat
Linear reaction rate 10-6 0.2 to 5 X 10-2 2 to 9 x I 03 (supersonic)
(m/sec) (subsonic) (subsonic)
Produces shock No No Yes
waves
Time for completing 10-2 to 10-3
reaction (sec)
Maximum pressure 0.07---0.14 0.7-100 (100-14,500)
[MPa (psi)] (10-20)
Process limitation By vaporization and heat transfer at By physical and chemical
burning surface properties of material,
( e.g., density,
composition)
Increase in burning Potential Overpressure and Detonation and violent
rate can result in: furnace sudden failure of rapid explosion of all
failure pressure container the propellant
the hot gas then penetrates pores or small cracks in the unburned propellant,
where the local confinement can cause the pressure to become very high locally,
the combustion front speeds up to shock wave speed with a low-pressure
differential, and it then accelerates further to a strong, fast, high-pressure
shock wave, characteristic of detonations. The degree and rigidity of the geo
metric confinement and a scale factor (e.g., larger-diameter grain) influence the
severity and occurrence of detonations.
Hazard Classification. Propellants that can experience a trans1t10n from
deflagration to detonation are considered more hazardous and are usually
designated as class 1.1-type propellants. Most propellants will burn, the case
may burst if chamber pressure becomes too high, but the propellant will not
detonate and are class 1.3 propellants. The required tests and rules for deter
mining this hazard category are explained in Ref. 12-7. Propellant samples are
subjected to various tests, including impact tests (dropped weight) and card
gap tests (which determine the force needed to initiate a propellant detonation
when a sample is subjected to a blast from a known booster explosive). If the
case should burst violently with a class 1.3 propellant, much of the remaining
unburnt propellant would be thrown out, but would then usually stop burning.
With a class 1.1 propellant, a powerful detonation can sometimes ensue, which
rapidly gasifies all the remaining propellant, and is much more powerful and
destructive than the bursting of the case under high pressure. Unfortunately,
the term "explosion" has been used to describe both a bursting of a case with
492 SOLID PROPELLANTS
its fragmentation of the motor and also the higher rate of energy release of a
detonation, which leads to a very rapid and more energetic fragmentation of
the motor.
The Department of Defense (DOD) classification of 1.1 or 1.3 determines
the method of labeling and the cost of shipping rocket propellants, loaded
military missiles, explosives, or ammunition; it also determines the required
limits on the amount of that propellant stored or manufactured in any one site
and the minimum separation distance of that site to the next building or site.
The DOD system (Ref. 12-7) is the same as that used by the United Nations.
Insensitive Munitions
In military operations an accidental ignition and unplanned operation or an
explosion of a rocket missile can cause severe damage to equipment and injure
or kill personnel. This has to be avoided or minimized by making the motor
designs and propellants insensitive to a variety of energy stimuli. The worst
scenario is a detonation of the propellant, releasing the explosive energy of all
of the propellant mass, and this scenario is to be avoided. The missiles and its
motors must undergo a series of prescribed tests to determine their resistance to
inadvertent ignition with the most likely energy inputs during a possible battle
situation. Table 12-5 describes a series of tests called out in a military speci
fication, which are detailed in Refs. 12-8 and 12-9. A threat hazard assessment
must be made prior to the tests, to evaluate the logistic and operational threats
during the missile's life cycle. The evaluation may cause some modifications to
the test setups, changes in the passing criteria, or the skipping of some of these
tests.
The missiles, together with their motors, are destroyed in these tests. If the
motor should detonate (an unacceptable result), the motor has to be redesigned
TABLE 12-5. Testing for Insensitivity of Rockets and Missiles
Test Description Criteria for Passing
Fast cook off Build a fire (of jet fuel or wood) underneath No reaction more severe than
the missile or its motor burning
Slow cook off Gradual heating (6°F/hr) to failure Same as above
Bullet impact One to three 50 caliber bullets fired at short Same as above
intervals
Fragment impact Small high-speed steel fragment Same as above
Sympathetic Detonation from an adjacent similar motor No detonation of test motor
detonation or a nearby specific munition
Shaped explosive Blast from specified shaped charge in No detonation
charge impact specified location
Spall impact Several high-speed spalled fragments from a Fire, but no explosion or
steel plate which is subjected to a shaped detonation
charge
12.3. HAZARDS 493
and/or have a change in propellant. There are some newer propellants that are
more resistant to these stimuli and are therefore preferred for tactical missile
applications, even though there is usually a penalty in propulsion performance.
If explosions (not detonations) occur, it may be possible to redesign the motor
and mitigate the effects of the explosion (make it less violent). For example, the
case can have a provision to vent itself prior to an explosion. Changes to the
shipping container can also mitigate some of these effects. If the result is a fire
(an acceptable result), it should be confined to the particular grain or motor.
Under some circumstances a burst failure of the case is acceptable.
Upper Pressure Limit
If the pressure-rise rate and the absolute pressure become extremely high (as in
some impact tests or in the high acceleration of a gun barrel), some propellants
will detonate. For many propellants these pressures are above approximately
1500 MPa or 225,000 psi, but for others they are lower (as low as 300 MPa or
45,000 psi). They represent an upper pressure limit beyond which a propellant
should not operate.
Toxicity
A large share of all rockets do not have a significant toxicity problem. A
number of propellant ingredients (e.g., some crosslinking agents and burning
rate catalysts) and a few of the plastics used in fiber-reinforced cases can be
dermatological or respiratory toxins; a few are carcinogens (cancer-causing
agents) or suspected carcinogens. They, and the mixed uncured propellant
containing these materials, have to be handled carefully to prevent operator
exposure. This means using gloves, face shields, good ventilation, and, with
some high-vapor-pressure ingredients, gas masks. The finished or cured grain
or motor is usually not toxic.
The exhaust plume gases can be very toxic if they contain beryllium or
berylium oxide particles, chlorine gas, hydrochloric acid gas, hydrofluoric
acid gas, or some other fluorine compounds. When an ammonium perchlorate
oxidizer is used, the exhaust gas can contain up to about 14% hydrochloric
acid. For large rocket motors this can be many tons of highly toxic gas. Test
and launch facilities for rockets with toxic plumes require special precautions
and occasionally special decontamination processes, as explained in Chapter
20.
Safety Rules
The most effective way to control hazards and prevent accidents is (I) to train
personnel in the hazards of each propellant of concern and to teach them how
to avoid hazardous conditions, prevent accidents, and how to recover from an
accident; (2) to design the motors, facilities, and the equipment to be safe; and
494 SOLID PROPELLANTS
(3) to institute and enforce rigid safety rules during design, manufacture, and
operation. There are many such rules. Examples are no smoking and no
matches in areas where there are propellants or loaded motors, wearing
spark-proof shoes and using spark-proof tools, shielding all electrical equip
ment, providing a water-deluge fire extinguishing system in test facilities to cool
motors or extinguish burning, or proper grounding of all electrical equipment
and items that could build up static electrical charges.
12.4. PROPELLANT INGREDIENTS
A number of relatively common propellant ingredients are listed in Table 12-6
for double-base propellants and in Table 12-7 for composite-type solid pro
pellants. They are categorized by major function, such as oxidizer,fuel, binder,
plasticizer, curing agent, and so on, and each category is described in this
section. However, several of the ingredients have more than one function.
These lists are not complete and at least 200 other ingredients have been
tried in experimental rocket motors.
A classification of modem propellants, including some new types that are
still in the experimental phase, is given in Table 12-8, according to their bin
ders, plasticizers, and solid ingredients; these solids may be an oxidizer, a solid
fuel, or a combination or compound of both.
The ingredient properties and impurities can have a profound effect on the
propellant characteristics. A seemingly minor change in one ingredient can
cause measurable changes in ballistic properties, physical properties, migra
tion, aging, or ease of manufacture. When the propellant's performance or
ballistic characteristics have tight tolerances, the ingredient purity and proper
ties must also conform to tight tolerances and careful handling (e.g., no expo
sure to moisture). In the remainder of this section a number of the important
ingredients, grouped by function, are briefly, discussed.
Inorganic Oxidizers
Some of the thermochemical properties of several oxidizers and oxygen radical
containing compounds are listed in Table 12-9. Their values depend on the
chemical nature of each ingredient.
Ammonium perchlorate (NH 4Cl0 4) is the most widely used crystalline oxi
dizer in solid propellants. Because of its good characteristics, including com
patibility with other propellant materials, good performance, quality,
uniformity, and availability, it dominates the solid oxidizer field. Other solid
oxidizers, particularly ammonium nitrate and potassium perchlorate, were
used and occasionally are still being used in production rockets but to a
large extent have been replaced by more modem propellants containing ammo
nium perchlorate. Many oxidizer compounds were investigated during the
1970s, but none reached production status.
12.4. PROPELLANT INGREDIENTS 495
TABLE 12--6. Typical Ingredients of Double-Base (DB) Propellants and Composite
Modified Double-Base (CMDB) Propellants
Type Percent Acronym Typical Chemicals
Binder 30--50 NC Nitrocellulose (solid), usually plasticized
with 20 to 50% nitroglycerine
Reactive plasticizer NG Nitroglycerine
(liquid explosive) DEGON Diethylene glycol dinitrate
20--50 TEGDN Triethylene glycol dinitrate
1
PON Propanedial-dini trate
TMETN Trimethylolethane trinitrate
Plasticizer DEP Diethyl phthalate
( organic liquid fuel) TA Triacetin
DMP Dimethyl phthalate
0--10 Dioctile phthalate
EC Ethyl centralite
DBP Dibutyl phthalate
Burn-rate Pb Sa Lead salicylate
{
modifier up to 3 PbSt Lead s teara te
Cu Sa Copper salicylate
CuSt Copper stearate
Coolant OXM Oxamine
Opacifier C Carbon black (powder or graphite
powder)
Stabilizer and {O ED Diethyl diphenyl
or antioxidant >I EC Ethyl centralite
DPA Diphenyl amine
Visible flame { KN0 Potassium nitrate
suppressant up to 2 K S03 Potassium sulphate
2 4
Lubricant >0.3 C Graphite
(for extruded Wax
propellant only)
Metal fuel" 0-15 Al Aluminum, fine powder (solid)
Crystalline oxidizer" { AP Ammonium perchlorate
0--15
AN Ammonium nitrate
Solid explosive crystals" Cyclotetramethylenetetranitramine
{HMX
0--20 ROX Cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine
NQ Nitroguanadine
a Several of these, but not all, are added to CMDB propellant.
The oxidizing potential of the perchlorates is generally high, which makes
this material suited to high specific impulse propellants. Both ammonium and
potassium perchlorate are only slightly soluble in water, a favorable trait for
propellant use. All the perchlorate oxidizers produce hydrogen chloride (HCl)
and other toxic and corrosive chlorine compounds in their reaction with fuels.
Care is required in firing rockets, particularly the very large rockets, to safe
guard operating personnel or communities in the path of exhaust gas clouds.
Ammonium perchlorate (AP) is supplied in the form of small white crystals.
Particle size and shape influences the manufacturing process and the propellant
burning rate. Therefore, close control of the crystal sizes and the size distribu-
496 SOLID PROPELLANTS
TABLE 12-7. Typical Ingredients of Composite Solid Propellants
Type Percent Acronym Typical Chemicals
r
Oxidizer Ammonium perchlorate
(crystalline) AN Ammonium nitrate
0---70 KP Potassium perchlorate
KN Potassium nitrate
rADN Ammonium dinitramine
Metal fuel Aluminum
( also acts as a Be Beryllium (experimental propellant
0---30
combustion only)
stabilizer) Zr Zirconium (also acts as bum-rate
modifier)
Fuel/Binder, rTPB Hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene
polybutadiene CTPB Carboxyl-terminated polybutadiene
5-18
type PBAN Polybutadiene acrylonitrile acrylic acid
PBAA Polybutadiene acrylic acid
Fuel/Binder, PEG Polyethylene glycol
polyether and PCP Polycaprolactone polyol
polyester type PGA Polyglycol adipate
0-15
PPG Polypropylene glycol
HTPE Hydroxyl-terminated polyethylene
PU Polyurethane polyester or polyether
Curing agent or MAPO Methyl aziridinyl phosphine oxide
crosslinker, which IPDI Isophorone diisocyanate
reacts with polymer TDI Toluene-2,4-diisocyanate
binder 0.2-3.5 HMDI Hexamethylene diisocyanide
DDI Dimery! diisocyanate
TMP Trimethylol propane
BITA Trimesoyl-1 (2-ethyl)-aziridine
Bum-rate modifier FeO Ferric oxide
nBF n-Butyl ferrocene
Oxides of Cu, Pb, Zr, Fe
0.2-3 Alkaline earth carbonates
Alkaline earth sulfates
rMX Metallo-organic compounds
Explosive filler Cyclotetramethylenetetranitramine
(solid) 0-40 RDX Cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine
NQ Nitroguanadine
Plasticizer/Pot life (DOP Dioctyl phthalate
control ( organic DOA Dioctyl adipate
liquid) 0-7 DOS Dioctyl sebacate
DMP Dimethyl phthalate
IDP lsodecyl pelargonate
12.4. PROPELLANT INGREDIENTS 497
TABLE 12-7. (Continued)
Type Percent Acronym Typical Chemicals
Energetic GAP Glycidyl azide polymer
plasticizer NG Nitroglycerine
(liquid) DEGDN Diethylene glycol dinitrate
0-14 BTTN Butanetriol trinitrate
TEGDN Triethylene glycol dinitrate
TMETN Trimethylolethane trinitrate
PCP Polycaprolactone polymer
Energetic fuel/ rAP Glycidyl azide polymer
binder PGN Propylglycidyl nitrate
0-15 BAMO/AMMO Bis-azidometh y lo xetane/ Azidom eth y I-
methyloxetane copolymer
BAMO/NMMO Bis-azidomethyloxetane/Nitramethyl-
methyloxetane copolymer
Bonding agent > 0.1 MT-4 MAPO-tartaric acid-adipic acid
(improves condensate
bond to solid HX-752 Bis-isophthal-methyl-aziridine
particles)
rPA
Stabilizer Diphenylamine
(reduces Phenylnaphthylamine
>0.5
chemical NMA N-methyl-p-nitroaniline
deterioration) Dini trodipheny Janine
Processing aid >0.5 Lecithin
Sodium lauryl sulfate
tion present in a given quantity or batch is required. AP crystals are rounded
(nearly ball shaped) to allow easier mixing than sharp, fractured crystals. They
come in sizes ranging from about 600 µm (lµm = 10-6 m) diameter to about
80 µm from the factory. Sizes below about 40 µm diameter are considered
hazardous (can easily be ignited and sometimes detonated) and are not
shipped; instead, the propellant manufacturer takes larger crystals and grinds
them (at the motor factory) to the smaller sizes (down to 2 µm) just before they
are incorporated into a propellant.
The inorganic nitrates are relatively low-performance oxidizers compared
with perchlorates. However, ammonium nitrate is used in some applications
because of its very low cost and smokeless and relatively nontoxic exhaust.
Its principal use is with low-burning-rate, low-performance rocket and gas
generator applications. Ammonium nitrate (AN) changes its crystal structure
at several phase transformation temperatures. These changes cause slight
changes in volume. One phase transformation at 32°C causes about a 3.4%
change in volume. Repeated temperature cycling through this transition tem
perature creates tiny voids in the propellant, and causes growth in the grain
and a change in physical or ballistic properties. The addition of a small amount
~
~ TABLE 12-8. Classification of Solid Rocket Propellants Used in Flying Vehicles According to their Binders, Plasticizers, and Solid
Ingredients
Solid Oxidizer Propellant
Designation Binder Plasticizer and/or Fuel Application
Double-base, DB Plasticized NC NG, TA, etc. None Minimum signature and
smoke
CMDBa Plasticized NC NG, TMETN, TA, BTTN, etc. Al, AP, KP Booster, sustainer, and
spacecraft
Same Same HMX, RDX, AP Reduced smoke
Same Same HMX, RDX, azides Minimum signature, gas
generator
EM CD Ba Plasticized NC + Same Like CMDB above, but generally superior mechanical properties
elastomeric polymer with elastomer added as binder
Polybutadiene HTPB DOA, !DP, DOP, DOA, etc. Al, AP, KP, HMX, RDX Booster, sustainer or
spacecraft; used
extensively in many
applications
HTPB Same AN, HMX, RDX, some AP Reduced smoke, gas
generator
CTPB, PBAN, PBAA All like HTPB above, but somewhat lower performance due to higher processing viscosity and
consequent lower solids content. Still used in applications with older designs
TPEa Thermoplastic elastomer Similar to HTPB, but without chemical curing process. TPEs cure (crosslink) via selective
crystallization of certain parts of the binder. Still are experimental propellants
Polyether and PEG, PPG, PCP, PGA, DOA, IDP, TMETN, DEGDN, etc. Al, AP, KP, HMX Booster, sustainer, or
polyesters and mixtures spacecraft
Energetic binder GAP, PGN, BAMO/ TMETN, BTTN, etc. GAP-azide, Like polyether/polyester propellants above, but with slightly
( other than NC) NMMO, BAMO/AMMO GAP-nitrate, NG higher performance. Experimental propellant.
a CMDB, composite-modified double-base; EMCDB, elastomer-modified cast double-base; TPE, thermoplastic elastomer. For definition of acronyms and abbreviation of propellant
ingredients see Tables 12-6 and 12--7.
12.4. PROPELLANT INGREDIENTS 499
TABLE 12-9. Comparison of Crystalline Oxidizers
Molecular Oxygen
Chemical Mass Density Content
Oxidizer Symbol (kg/kg-mo!) (kg/m3 ) (wt%) Remarks
Ammonium NH4CJ04 117.49 1949 54.5 Low n, low cost,
perchlorate readily available
Potassium KCl04 138.55 2519 46.2 Low burning rate,
perchlorate medium
performance
Sodium NaCJ04 122.44 2018 52.3 Hygroscopic, high
perchlorate performance
Ammonium NH4N03 80.0 1730 60.0 Smokeless, medium
nitrate performance
Potassium KN03 101.10 2109 47.5 Low cost, low
nitrate performance
of stabilizer such as nickel oxide (NiO) or potassium nitrate (KN0 3) seems to
change the transition temperature to above 60°C, a high enough value so that
normal ambient temperature cycling will no longer cause recrystallization
(Refs. 12-10 and 12-11 ). AN with such an additive is known as phase-stabilized
ammonium nitrate (PSAN). AN is hygroscopic, and the absorption of moisture
will degrade propellant made with AN.
Fuels
This section discusses solid fuels. Powdered spherical aluminum is the most
common. It consists of small spherical particles (5 to 60 µm diameter) and is
used in a wide variety of composite and composite-modified double-base pro
pellant formulations, usually constituting 14 to 20% of the propellant by
weight. Small aluminum particles can burn in air and this powder is mildly
toxic if inhaled. During rocket combustion this fuel is oxidized into aluminum
oxide. These oxide particles tend to agglomerate and form larger particles. The
aluminum increases the heat of combustion, the propellant density, the com
bustion temperature, and thus the specific impulse. The oxide is in liquid
droplet form during combustion and solidifies in the nozzle as the gas tem
perature drops. When in the liquid state the oxide can form a molten slag
which can accumulate in pockets (e.g., around an impropely designed sub
merged nozzle), thus adversely affecting the vehicle's mass ratio. It also can
deposit on walls inside the combustion chamber, as described in Refs. 12-12
and 14---13.
Boron is a high-energy fuel that is lighter than aluminum and has a high
melting point (2304°C). It is difficult to burn with high efficiency in combustion
chambers of reasonable length. However, it can be oxidized at reasonable
500 SOLID PROPELLANTS
efficiency if the boron particle size is very small. Boron is used advantageously
as a propellant in combination rocket-air-burning engines, where there is ade
quate combustion volume and oxygen from the air.
Beryllium burns much more easily than boron and improves the specific
impulse of a solid propellant motor, usually by about 15 sec, but it and its
oxide are highly toxic powders absorbed by animals and humans when inhaled.
The technology with composite propellants using powdered beryllium fuel has
been experimentally proven, but its severe toxicity makes its application
unlikely.
Theoretically, both aluminum hydride (AIH 3) and beryllium hydride (BeH 2)
are attractive fuels because of their high heat release and gas-volume contribu
tion. Specific impulse gains are 10 to 15 sec for Al H and 25 to 30 sec for
2 3
BeH 2• Both are difficult to manufacture and both deteriorate chemically during
storage, with loss of hydrogen. These compounds are not used today in
practical fuels.
Binders
The binder provides the structural glue or matrix in which solid granular
ingredients are held together in a composite propellant. The raw materials
are liquid prepolymers or monomers. Polyethers, polyesters and poly-buta
dienes have been used (see Tables 12-6 and 12-7). After they are mixed with
the solid ingredients, cast and cured, they form a hard rubber-like material
that constitutes the grain. Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and polyurethane (PU)
(Table 12-1) were used 40 years ago and are still used in a few motors,
mostly of old design. Binder materials are also really fuels for solid propel
lant rockets and are oxidized in the combustion process. The binding ingre
dient, usually a polymer of one type or another, has a primary effect on
motor reliability, mechanical properties, propellant processing complexity,
storability, aging, and costs. Some polymers undergo complex chemical reac
tions, crosslinking, and branch chaining during curing of the propellant.
HTPB has been the favorite binder in recent years, because it allows a some
what higher solids fraction (88 to 90% of AP and Al) and relatively good
physical properties at the temperature limits. Several common binders are
listed in Tables 12-1, 12-6 and 12-7. Elastomeric binders have been added
to plasticized double-base-type nitrocellulose to improve physical properties.
Polymerization occurs when the binder monomer and its crosslinking agent
react (beginning in the mixing process) to form long-chain and complex
three-dimensional polymers. Other types of binders, such as PVC, cure or
plasticize without a molecular reaction (see Refs. 12-2, 12-3, and 12-13).
Often called plastisol-type binders, they form a very viscous dispersion of a
powdered polymerized resin in nonvolatile liquid. They polymerize slowly by
interaction.
12.4. PROPELLANT INGREDIENTS 501
Burning-Rate Modifiers
A burning-rate catalyst or burning-rate modifier helps to accelerate or decele
rate the combustion at the burning surface and increases or decreases the value
of the propellant burning rate. It permits the tailoring of the burning rate to fit
a specific grain design and thrust-time curve. Several are listed in Tables 12-6
and 12-7. Some, like iron oxide or lead stearate, increase the burning rate;
however, others, like lithium fluoride, will reduce the burning rate of some
composite propellants. The inorganic catalysts do not contribute to the com
bustion energy, but consume energy when they are heated to the combustion
temperature. These modifiers are effective because they change the combustion
mechanism, which is described in Chapter 13. Chapter 2 of Ref. 12-2 gives
examples of how several modifiers change the burning rate of composite pro
pellants.
Plasticizers
A plasticizer is usually a relatively low-viscosity liquid organic ingredient which
is also a fuel. It is added to improve the elongation of the propellant at low
temperatures and to improve processing properties, such as lower viscosity for
casting or longer pot life of the mixed but uncured propellants. The plasticizers
listed in Tables 12-6, 12-7, and 12-8 show several plasticizers.
Curing Agents or Crosslinkers
A curing agent or crosslinker causes the prepolymers to form longer chains of
larger molecular mass and interlocks between chains. Even though these mate
rials are present in small amounts (0.2 to 3%), a minor change in the percen
tage will have a major effect on the propellant physical properties,
manufacturability, and aging. It is used only with composite propellants. It
is the ingredient that causes the binder to solidify and become hard. Several
curing agents are listed in Table 12-7.
Energetic Binders and Plasticizers
Energetic binders and/or plasticizers are used in lieu of the conventional
organic materials. They contain oxidizing species (such as azides or organic
nitrates) as well as organic species. They add some additional energy to the
propellant causing a modest increase in performance. They serve also as a
binder to hold other ingredients, or as an energetic plasticizer liquid. They
can self-react exothermally and burn without a separate oxidizer. Glycidyl
azide polymer (GAP) is an example of an energetic, thermally stable, hydro
xyl-terminated prepolymer that can be polymerized. It has been used in experi-
502 SOLID PROPELLANTS
ental propellants. Other energetic binder or plasticizer materials are listed in
Tables 12-6, 12-7 and 12-8.
Organic Oxidizers or Explosives
Organic oxidizers are explosive organic compounds with ~ N0 2 radical or
other oxidizing fractions incorporated into the molecular structure. References
12-2 and 12-13 describe their properties, manufacture, and application. These
are used with high-energy propellants or smokeless propellants. They can be
crystalline solids, such as the nitramines HMX or RDX, fibrous solids such as
NC, or energetic plasticizer liquids such as DEGN or NG. These materials can
react or burn by themselves when initiated with enough activating energy, but
all of them are explosives and can also be detonated under certain conditions.
Both HMX and RDX are stoichiometrically balanced materials and the addi
tion of either fuel or oxidizer only will reduce the T and Is values. Therefore,
1
when binder fuels are added to hold the HMX or RDX crystals in a viscoelastic
matrix, it is also necessary to add an oxidizer such as AP or AN.
RDX and HMX are quite similar in structure and properties. Both are white
crystalline solids that can be made in different sizes. For safety, they are
shipped in a desensitizing liquid, which has to be removed prior to propellant
processing. HMX has a higher density, a higher detonation rate, yields more
energy per unit volume, and has a higher melting point. NG, NC, HMX, and
RDX are also used extensively in military and commercial explosives. HMX or
RDX can be included in DB, CMDB, or composite propellants to achieve
higher performance or other characteristics. The percentage added can range
up to 60% of the propellant. Processing propellant with these or similar ingre
dients can be hazardous, and the extra safety precautions make the processing
more expensive.
Liquid nitroglycerine (NG) by itself is very sensitive to shock, impact, or
friction. It is an excellent plasticizer for propellants when desensitized by the
addition of other materials (liquids like triacetin or dibutyl phthalate) or by
compounding with nitrocellulose. It is readily dissolved in many organic sol
vents, and in turn it acts as a solvent for NC and other solid ingredients (Ref.
12-13).
Nitrocellulose (NC) is a key ingredient in DB and CMDB propellant. It is
made by the acid nitration of natural cellulose fibers from wood or cotton and
is a mixture of several organic nitrates. Although crystalline, it retains the fiber
structure of the original cellulose (see Ref. 12-13). The nitrogen content is
important in defining the significant properties of nitrocellulose and can
range from 8 to 14%, but the grades used for propellant are usually between
12.2 and 13.1 %. Since it is impossible to make NC from natural products with
an exact nitrogen content, the required properties are achieved by careful
blending. Since the solid fiber-like NC material is difficult to make into a
12.4. PROPELLANT INGREDIENTS 503
grain, it is usually mixed with NG, DEGN, or other plasticizer to gelatinize or
solvate it when used with DB and CMDB propellant.
Additives
Small amounts of additives are used for many purposes, including accelerating
or lengthening the curing time, improving the rheological properties (easier
casting of viscous raw mixed propellant), improving the physical properties,
adding opaqueness to a transparent propellant to prevent radiation heating at
places other than the burning surface, limiting migration of chemical species
from the propellant to the binder or vice versa, minimizing the slow oxidation
or chemical deterioration during storage, and improving the aging characteris
tics or the moisture resistance. Bonding agents are additives to enhance adhe
sion between the solid ingredients (AP or Al) and the binder. Stabilizers are
intended to minimize the slow chemical or physical reactions that can occur in
propellants. Catalysts are sometimes added to the crosslinker or curing agent
to slow down the curing rate. Lubricants aid the extrusion process.
Desensitizing agents help to make a propellant more resistant to inadvertent
energy stimulus. These are usually added in very small quantities.
Particle-Size Parameters
The size, shape, and size distribution of the solid particles of AP, Al or HMX in
the propellant can have a major influence on the composite propellant char
acteristics. The particles are spherical in shape, because this allows easier mix
ing and a higher percentage of solids in the propellant than shapes of sharp
edged natural crystals. Normally, the ground AP oxidizer crystals are graded
according to particle size ranges as follows:
Coarse 400 to 600 µm (1 µm = 10-6 m)
Medium 50 to 200 µm
Fine 5 to 15 µm
Ultrafine submicrometer to 5 µm
Coarse and medium-grade AP crystals are handled as class 1.3 materials,
whereas the fine and ultrafine grades are considered as class I. I high explosives
and are usually manufactured on-site from the medium or coarse grades. (See
Section 12.3 for a definition of these explosive hazard classifications.) Most
propellants use a blend of oxidizer particle sizes, if only to maximize the weight
of oxidizer per unit volume of propellant, with the small particles filling part of
the voids between the larger particles.
Figure 12-8 shows the influence of varying the ratio of coarse to fine oxidi
zer particle sizes on propellant burning rate and also the influence of a burning
rate additive. Figure 12-9 shows that the influence of particle size of the alu
minum fuel on propellant burning rate is much less pronounced than that of
oxidizer particle size. Figure 12-8 also shows the effect of particle size. Particle
504 SOLID PROPELLANTS
0.80----------------~
Strand burner:
600 psi, 80°F
0.76 f-------+------+-------..'--------J
u
(l)
-V-)-
-~ 0.72 f-------+----
f
g,o 0.681------------l.-
.E
:::,
Cil
0.641----------<'f.:..._
0.60
L..__ ____ J__ ____~ _____ _,
65/35 60/40 55/45 50/50
Coarse/fine ratio
FIGURE 12-8. Typical effect of oxidizer (ammonium perchlorate) particle size mixture
and burning rate additive on the burning rate of a composite propellant. (From NASA
report SP-72262, Motor Propellant Development, July I, 1967.)
size range and particle shape of both the oxidizer [usually ammonium perchlo
rate (AP)] and solid fuel (usually aluminum) have a significant effect on the
solid packing fraction and the rheological properties (associated with the flow
ing or pouring of viscous liquids) of uncured composite propellant. By defini
tion, the packing fraction is the volume fraction of all solids when packed to
minimum volume (a theoretical condition). High packing fraction makes mix
ing, casting, and handling during propellant fabrication more difficult. Figure
12-10 shows the distribution of AP particle size using a blend of sizes; the
shape of this curve can be altered drastically by controlling the size ranges and
ratios. Also, the size range and shape of the solid particles affect the solids
loading ratio, which is the mass ratio of solid to total ingredients in the uncured
propellants. Computer-optimized methods exist for adjusting particle-size dis
tributions for improvement of the solids loading. The solids loading can be as
0.23-----------..-------,----,
Strand burner:
500 psi, room temperature
{
.bEO
0.21
:5
Cil
0·20 OL_ _ __l.10_ __2L 0 __3. ..L0_ __4 L-0--5-'-0---'60
Particle size, µm
FIGURE 12-9. Typical effect of aluminum particle size on propellant burning rate for a
composite propellant. (From NASA Report 8075, Solid Propellant Processing Factors
in Rocket Motor Design, October 1971.)
12.5. OTHER PROPELLANT CATEGORIES 505
Particle diameter, µm
FIGURE 12-10. The oxidizer (AP) particle size distribution is a blend of two or more
different particle sizes; this particular composite propellant consists of a narrow cut at
about 10 µm and a broad region from 50 to 200 µm.
high as 90% in some composite propellants. High solids loading, desired for
high performance, introduces complexity and higher costs into the processing
of propellant. Trade-off among ballistic (performance) requirements, processi
bility, mechanical strength, rejection rates, and facility costs is a continuing
problem with many high-specific-impulse composite propellants. References
12-2 and 12-13 give information on the influence of particle size on motor
performance.
A monomodal propellant has one size of solid oxidizer particles, a bimodal
has two sizes (say, 20 and 200 µm), and a trimodal propellant has three sizes,
because this allows a larger mass of solids to be placed into the propellant.
Problem 12-1 has a sketch that explains how the voids between the large
particles are filled with smaller particles.
12.5. OTHER PROPELLANT CATEGORIES
Gas Generator Propellants
Gas generator propellants produce hot gas but not thrust. They usually have a
low combustion temperature (800 to 1600 K), and most do not require insu
lators when used in metal cases. Typical applications of gas generators were
listed in Table 11-1. A large variety of propellants have been used to create hot
gas for gas generators, but only a few will be mentioned.
Stabilized AN-based propellants have been used for many years with various
ingredients or binders. They give a clean, essentially smokeless exhaust and a
low combustion temperature. Because of their low burning rate they are useful
for long-duration gas generator applications, say 30 to 300 sec. Typical com-
506 SOLID PROPELLANTS
positions are shown in Ref. 12-11, and a typical propellant is described in
Table 12-10.
One method of reducing flame temperature is to burn conventional hot AP
propellant and then add water to it to cool the gases to a temperature where
uncooled metals can contain them. This is used on the MX missile launcher
tube gas generator (Ref. 12-14). Another formulation uses HMX or RDX with
an excess of polyether- or polyester-type polyurethane.
For the inflation of automobile collision safety bags the exhaust gas must be
nontoxic, smoke free, have a low temperature (will not burn people), be quickly
initiated, and be reliably available. One solution is to use alkali azides (e.g.,
NaN 3 or KN 3) with an oxide and an oxidizer. The resulting nitrates or oxides
are solid materials that are removed by filtering and the gas is clean and is
largely moderately hot nitrogen. In one model, air can be aspirated into the air
TABLE 12-10. Typical Gas Generator Propellant using Ammonium
Nitrate Oxidizer
Ballistic Properties
Calculated flame temperature (K) 1370
Burning rate at 6.89 MPa and 20°C (mm/sec) 2.1
Pressure exponent n (dimensionless) 0.37
Temperature sensitivity CJp (%/K) 0.22
Theoretical characteristic velocity, c* (m/sec) 1205
Ratio of specific heats 1.28
Molecular weight of exhaust gas 19
Composition ( Mass Fraction)
Ammonium nitrate(%) 78
Polymer binder plus curing agent(%) 17
Additives (processing aid, stabilizer, antioxidant)(%) 5
Oxidizer particle size, (µm) 150
Exhaust Gas Composition (Molar % )
Water 26
Carbon monoxide 19
Carbon dioxide 7
Nitrogen 21
Hydrogen 27
Methane Trace
Physical Properties at 25°C or 298 K
Tensile strength (MPa) 1.24
Elongation (%) 5.4
Modulus of elasticity in tension (N/m2 ) 34.5
Specific gravity 1.48
12.5. OTHER PROPELLANT CATEGORIES 507
bag by the hot, high-pressure gas (see Ref. 12-15). One particular composition
uses 65 to 75% NaN 3, 10 to 28% Fe 20 3, 5 to 16% NaN0 3 as an oxidizer, a
burn rate modifier, and a small amount of Si0 for moisture absorption. The
2
resultant solid nitride slag is caught in a filter.
The power P delivered by a gas generator can be expressed as
(12-1)
where riz is the mass flow rate, h and h the enthalpies per unit mass, respec
1 2
tively, at the gas generator chamber and exhaust pressure conditions, T is the
1
flame temperature in the gas generator chamber, R the gas constant, p /p is
2 1
the reciprocal of the pressure ratio through which these gases are expanded,
and k the specific heat ratio. Because the flame temperature is relatively low
there is no appreciable dissociation, and frozen equilibrum calculations are
usually adequate.
Smokeless or Low-Smoke Propellant
Certain types of DB propellant, DB modified with HMX, and AN composites
can be nearly smokeless. There is no or very little particulate matter in the
exhaust gas. These minimum-smoke propellants are not a special class with a
peculiar formulation but a variety of one of the classes mentioned previously.
Propellants containing Al, Zr, Fe 0 (burn rate modifier), or other metallic
2 3
species will form visible clouds of small solid metal or metal oxide particles in
the exhaust.
For certain military applications a smokeless propellant is needed and the
reasons are stated in Chapter 18 (Exhaust Plumes). It is very difficult to make a
propellant which has a truly smokeless exhaust gas. We therefore distinguish
between low-smoke also called minimum-smoke (almost smokeless), and
reduced-smoke propellants, which have a faintly visible plume. A visible
smoke trail comes from solid particles in the plume, such as aluminum
oxide. With enough of these particles, the exhaust plume will scatter or absorb
light and become visible as primary smoke. The particles can act as focal points
for moisture condensation, which can occur in saturated air or under high
humidity, low temperature conditions. Also, vaporized plume molecules,
such as water or hydrochloric acid, can condense in cold air and form droplets
and thus a cloud trail. These processes create a vapor trail or secondary smoke.
Several types of DB propellant, DB modified with HMX, nitramine (HMX
or RDX) based composites, AN composites, or combinations of these, give
very few or no solid particles in their exhaust gas. They do not contain alumi
num or AP, generally have lower specific impulse than comparable propellants
with AP, and have very little primary smoke, but can have secondary smoke in
unfavorable weather. Several of these propellants have been used in tactical
missiles.
508 SOLID PROPELLANTS
Reduced-smoke propellants are usually composite propellants with low con
centrations of aluminum (1 to 6%); they have a low percentage of aluminum
oxide in the exhaust plume, are faintly visible as primary smoke, but can
precipitate heavy secondary smoke in unfavorable weather. Their performance
is substantially better than that of minimum-smoke propellants, as seen in Fig.
12-1.
Igniter Propellants
The process of propellant ignition is discussed in Section 13.2, and several types
of igniter hardware are discussed in Section 14.3. Propellants for igniters, a
specialized field of propellant technology, is described here briefly. The require
ments for an igniter propellant will include the following:
Fast high heat release and high gas evolution per unit igniter propellant
mass to allow rapid filling of grain cavity with hot gas and partial pres
surization of the chamber.
Stable initiation and operation over a wide range of pressures (subatmo
spheric to chamber pressure) and smooth burning at low pressure with no
ignition overpressure surge.
Rapid initiation of igniter propellant burning and low ignition delays.
Low sensitivity of burn rate to ambient temperature changes and low burn-
ing rate pressure exponent.
Operation over the required ambient temperature range.
Safe and easy to manufacture, safe to ship and handle.
Good aging characteristics and long life.
Minimal moisture absorption or degradation with time.
Low cost of ingredients and fabrication.
Some igniters not only generate hot combustion gas, but also hot solid particles
or hot liquid droplets, which radiate heat and impinge on the propellant sur
face, embed themselves into this surface, and assist in achieving propellant
burning on the exposed grain surface.
There have been a large variety of different igniter propellants and their
development has been largely empirical. Black powder, which was used in early
motors, is no longer favored, because it is difficult to duplicate its properties.
Extruded double-base propellants are used frequently, usually as a large num
ber of small cylindrical pellets. In some cases rocket propellants that are used in
the main grain are also used for the igniter grain; sometimes they are slightly
modified. They are used in the form of a small rocket motor within a large
motor that is to be ignited. A common igniter formulation uses 20 to 35%
boron and 65 to 80% potassium nitrate with I to 5% binder. Binders typically
include epoxy resins, graphite, nitrocellulose, vegetable oil, polyisobutylene,
and other binders listed in Table 12-7. Another formulation uses magnesium
12.6. LINERS, INSULATORS, AND INHIBITORS 509
with a fluorocarbon (Teflon); it gives hot particles and hot gas (Refs. 12-16 and
12-17). Other igniter propellants are listed in Ref. 12-18.
12.6. LINERS, INSULATORS, AND INHIBITORS
These three layers at the interface of a grain were defined in Section 11.3. Their
materials do not contain any oxidizing ingredients; they will ablate, cook, char,
vaporize, or distintegrate in the presence of hot gases. Many will burn if the hot
combustion gas contains even a small amount of oxidizing species, but they will
not usually burn by themselves. The liner, internal insulator, or inhibitor must
be chemically compatible with the propellant and each other to avoid migration
(described below) or changes in material composition; they must have good
adhesive strength, so that they stay bonded to the propellant, or to each other.
The temperature at which they suffer damage or experience a large surface
regression should be high. They should all have a low specific gravity, thus
reducing inert mass. Typical materials are neoprene (specific gravity 1.23),
butyl rubber (0.93), a synthetic rubber called ethylenepropylene diene or
EPDM (0.86), or the binder used in the propellant, such as polybutadiene
(0.9 to 1.0); these values are low compared with a propellant specific gravity
of 1.6 to 1.8. For low-smoke propellant these three rubber-like materials
should give off some gas, but few, if any, solid particles (see Ref. 12-19).
In addition to the desired characteristics listed in the previous paragraph,
the liner should be a soft stretchable rubber-type thin material (typically 0.02 to
0.04 in. thick with 200 to 450% elongation) to allow relative movement along
the bond line between the grain and the case. This differential expansion occurs
because the thermal coefficient of expansion of the grain is typically an order of
magnitude higher than that of the case. A liner will also seal fiber-wound cases
(particularly thin cases), which are often porous, so that high-pressure hot gas
cannot escape. A typical liner for a tactical guided missile has been made from
polypropylene glycol (about 57%), a titanium oxide filler (about 20%), a di
isocyanate crosslinker (about 20%), and minor ingredients such as an antiox
idant. The motor case had to be preheated to about 82°C prior to application.
Ethylenepropylene diene monomer (EPDM) is linked into ethylenepropylene
diene terpolymer to form a synthetic rubber which is often used as polymer for
liners; it adheres and elongates nicely.
In some motors today the internal insulator not only provides for the ther
mal protection of the case from the hot combustion gases, but also often serves
the function of the liner for good bonding between propellant and insulator or
insulator and case. Most motors still have a separate liner and an insulating
layer. The thermal internal insulator should fulfill these additional
requirements:
1. It must be erosion resistant, particularly in the insulation of the motor aft
end or blast tube. This is achieved in part by using tough elastomeric
510 SOLID PROPELLANTS
materials, such as neoprene or butyl rubber, that are chemically resistant
to the hot gas and the impact of particulates. This surface integrity is also
achieved by forming a porous black carbon layer on its heated surface
called a porous char layer, which remains after some of the interstial
materials have been decomposed and vaporized.
2. It must provide good thermal resistance and low thermal conductivity to
limit heat transfer to the case and thus keep the case below its maximum
allowable temperature, which is usually between 160 and 350°C for the
plastic in composite material cases and about 550 and 950°C for most
steel cases. This is accomplished by filling the insulator with silicon oxide,
graphite, Kevlar, or ceramic particles. Asbestos is an excellent filler mate
rial, but is no longer used because of its health hazard.
3. It should allow a large-deformation or strain to accommodate grain
deflections upon pressurization or temperature cycling, and transfer
loads between the grain and the case.
4. The surface regression should be minimal so as to retain much of its
original geometric surface contour and allow a thin insulator.
A simple relationship for the thickness d at any location in the motor
depends on the exposure time te, the erosion rate re (obtained from erosion
tests at the likely gas velocity and temperature), and the safety factor f which
can range from 1.2 to 2.0:
d = terJ (12-2)
Some designers use the simple rule that the insulation depth is twice the charred
depth.
The thickness of the insulation is not usually uniform; it can vary by a factor
of up to 20. It is thicker at locations such as the aft done, where it is exposed for
longer intervals and at higher scrubbing velocities than the insulator layers
protected by bonded propellant. Before making a material selection, it is neces
sary to evaluate the flow field and the thermal environment (combustion tem
perature, gas composition, pressure, exposure duration, internal ballistics) in
order to carry out a thermal analysis (erosion prediction and estimated thick
ness of insulator). An analysis of loads and the deflections under loads at
different locations of the motor are needed to estimate shear and compression
stresses. If it involves high stresses or a relief flap, a structural analysis is also
needed. Various computer programs, such as the one mentioned in Refs. 12-20
and 12-21, are used for these analyses.
An inhibitor is usually made of the same kinds of materials as internal
insulators. They are applied (bonded, molded, glued, or sprayed) to grain
surfaces that should not burn. In a segmented motor, for example (see Fig.
14-2), where burning is allowed only on the internal port area, the faces of the
cylindrical grain sections are inhibited.
12.7. PROPELLANT PROCESSING AND MANUFACTURE 511
Migration is the transfer of mobile (liquid) chemical species from the solid
propellant to the liner, insulator, or inhibitor, or vice versa. Liquid plasticizers
such as NG or DEGN or unreacted monomers or liquid catalysts are known to
migrate. This migratory transfer occurs very slowly; it can cause dramatic
changes in physical properties (e.g., the propellant next to the liner becomes
brittle or weak) and there are several instances where nitroglycerine migrated
into an insulator and made it flammable. Migration can be prevented or inhib
ited by using (I) propellants without plasticizers, (2) insulators or binders with
plasticizers identical to those used in propellants, (3) a thin layer of an imper
vious material or a migration barrier (such as PU or a thin metal film), and (4)
an insulator material that will not allow•migration (e.g., PU) (see Ref. 12-22).
The graphite-epoxy motors used to boost the Delta launch vehicle use a
three-layer liner: EPDM (ethylenepropylene diene terpolymer) as a thin primer
to enhance bond strength, a polyurethane barrier to prevent migration of the
plasticizer into the EPDM liner, and a plasticized HTPB-rich liner to prevent
burning next to the case-bond interface. The composite AP-Al propellant also
uses the same HTPB binder.
Liners, insulators, or inhibitors can be applied to the grain in several ways:
by painting, coating, dipping, spraying, or by gluing a sheet or strip to the case
or the grain. Often an automated, robotic machine is used to achieve uniform
thickness and high quality. Reference 12-21 describes the manufacture of par
ticular insulators.
An external insulation is often applied to the outside of the motor case,
particularly in tactical missiles or high-acceleration launch boosters. This insu
lation reduces the heat flow from the air boundary layer outside the vehicle
surface (which is aerodynamically heated) to the case and then to the propel
lant. It thus prevents fiber-reinforced plastic cases from becoming weak or the
propellant from becoming soft or, in extreme situations, from being ignited.
This insulator must withstand the oxidation caused by aerodynamically heated
air, have good adhesion, have structural integrity to loads imposed by the flight
or launch, and must have a reasonable cure temperature. Materials ordinarily
used as internal insulators are unsatisfactory, because they burn in the atmo
sphere and generate heat. The best is a nonpyrolyzing, low-thermal-conductiv
ity refractory material (Ref. 12-23) such as high-temperature paint. The
internal and external insulation also helps to reduce the grain temperature
fluctuations and thus the thermal stresses imposed by thermal cycling, such
as day-night variations or high- and low-altitude temperature variations for
airborne missiles.
12.7. PROPELLANT PROCESSING AND MANUFACTURE
The manufacture of solid propellant involves complex physical and chemical
processes. In the past, propellant has been produced by several different pro
cesses, including the compaction or pressing of powder charges, extrusion of
512 SOLID PROPELLANTS
propellant through dies under pressure using heavy presses, and mixing with a
solvent which is later evaporated. Even for the same type of propellant (e.g.,
double-base, composite, or composite double-base) the fabrication processes
are usually not identical for different manufacturers, motor types, sizes, or
propellant formulation, and no single simple generalized process flowsheet or
fabrication technique is prevalent. Most of the rocket motors in production
today use composite-type propellants and therefore some emphasis on this
process is given here.
Figure 12-11 shows a representative flowsheet for the manufacture of a
complete solid rocket motor with a composite propellant made by batch pro
cesses. Processes marked with an asterisk are potentially hazardous, are usually
operated or controlled remotely, and are usually performed in buildings
designed to withstand potential fires or explosions. The mixing and casting
processes are the most complex and are more critical than other processes in
determining the quality, performance, burn rate, and physical properties of the
resulting propellant.
The rheological properties of the uncured propellant, meaning its flow prop
erties in terms of shear rate, stress, and time, are all-important to the proces
sibility of the propellant, and these properties usually change substantially
throughout the length of the processing line. Batch-type processing of propel
lant, including the casting (pouring) of propellant into motors that serve as
their own molds, is the most common method. For very large motors several
days are needed for casting perhaps 40 batches into a single case, forming a
single grain. Vacuum is almost always imposed on the propellant during the
mixing and casting operations to remove air and other dispersed gases and to
avoid air bubbles in the grain. Viscosity measurements of the mixed propellant
(10,000 to 20,000 poise) are made for quality control. Vacuum, temperature,
vibration, energy input of the mixer, and time are some of the factors affecting
the viscosity of the uncured propellant. Time is important in terms of pot life,
that period of time the uncured propellant remains reasonably fluid after mix
ing before it cures and hardens. Short pot life (a few hours) requires fast
operations in emptying mixers, measuring for quality control, transporting,
and casting into motors. Some binder systems, such as those using PVC,
give a very long pot life and avoid the urgency of haste in the processing
line. References 12-3, 12-18, and 12-24 give details on propellant processing
techniques and equipment.
Double-base propellants and modified double-base propellants are manu
factured by a different set of processes. The key is the diffusion of the liquid
nitroglycerine into the fibrous solid matrix or nitrocellulose, thus forming, by
means of salvation, a fairly homogeneous, well-dispersed, relatively strong
solid material. Several processes for making double-base rocket propellant
are in use today, including extrusion and slurry casting. In the slurry casting
process the case (or the mold) is filled with solid casting powder (a series of
small solid pellets of nitrocellulose with a small amount of nitroglycerine) and
the case is then flooded with liquid nitroglycerine, which then solvates the
12.7. PROPELLANT PROCESSING AND MANUFACTURE 513
Chemical ingredients receiving, storage, inspection, weighing and preparation
~----------------------------1
I Igniter * Oxidizer Aluminum Binder Additi es Curing I
I I
chemicals crystals powder (monomer) v agent
L_ ---- _...1
Store
Weigh, *
blend, mix
and cure
*
* *
Clean & apply Inspect,
Casting Clean & Fabricate
Cure case insulator & assemble into case repair tooling tooling
liner &test
Fabricate Fabricate/ *
and mold aft &
assemble fwd. domes, Curing
case insulators
& flaps
*
Remove
mandrel
Fabricate Inspect & tooling
nozzle & clean
*
Machine
off excess
Electrical
Safe and propellant
test &
arm device
inspect
Fabricate TVC tests
TVC .& inspect
* Inspect,
Fabricate Igniter
check-out,
igniter assembly &
pack &
hardware check-out
ship
FIGURE 12-11. Simplified manufacturing process flow diagram for a rocket motor
and its composite solid propellant.
514 SOLID PROPELLANTS
pellets. Figure 12-12 shows a simplified diagram of a typical setup for a slurry
cast process. Double-base propellant manufacturing details are shown in Refs.
12-3 and 12-13.
Mandrels are used during casting and curing to assure a good internal cavity
or perforation. They are made of metal in the shape of the internal bore (e.g.,
star or dogbone) and are often slightly tapered and coated with a nonbonding
material, such as Teflon, to facilitate the withdrawal of the mandrel after
curing without tearing the grain. For complicated internal passages, such as
a conocyl, a complex built-up mandrel is necessary, which can be withdrawn
through the nozzle flange opening in smaller pieces or which can be collapsed.
!P ressurized
hydraulic
Hot air Fixture for fluid R pre eg su sl ua rt ee d
supply for appling pressure Vacuum or air supply
during cure air exhaust
for cure
Solvent
tank
Solvent
(NG)
Solvent distributor cap
FIGURE 12-12. Simplified diagram of one system for slurry casting and initial curing
of a double-base solid propellant.
PROBLEMS 515
Some manufacturers have had success in making permanent mandrels (which
are not withdrawn but stay with the motor) out of lightweight foamed propel
lant, which burns very quickly once it is ignited.
An important objective in processing is to produce a propellant grain free of
cracks, low-density areas, voids, or other flaws. In general, voids and other
flaws degrade the ballistic and mechanical properties of the propellant grain.
Even the inclusion of finely dispersed gas in a propellant can result in an
abnormally high burning rate, one so high as to cause catastrophic motor
failure.
The finished grain (or motor) is usually inspected for defects (cracks, voids,
and debonds) using x-ray, ultrasonic, heat conductivity, or other nondestruc
tive inspection techniques. Samples of propellant are taken from each batch,
tested for rheological properties, and cast into physical property specimens
and/or small motors which are cured and subsequently tested. A determination
of the sensitivity of motor performance, including possible failure, to propel
lant voids and other flaws often requires the test firing of motors with known
defects. Data from the tests are important in establishing inspection criteria for
accepting and rejecting production motors.
Special process equipment is needed in the manufacture of propellant. For
composite propellants this includes mechanical mixers (usually with two or
three blades rotating on vertical shafts agitating propellant ingredients in a
mixer bowl under vacuum), casting equipment, curing ovens, or machines
for automatically applying the liner or insulation to the case. Double-base
processing requires equipment for mechanically working the propellant (roll
ers, presses) or special tooling for allowing a slurry cast process. Computer
aided filament winding machines are used for laying the fibers of fiber-rein
forced plastic cases and nozzles.
PROBLEMS
1. Ideally the solid oxidizer particles in a propellant can be considered spheres of uni
form size. Three sizes of particles are available: coarse at 500 µm, medium at 50 µm,
and fine at 5 µm, all at a specific gravity of 1.95, and a viscoelastic fuel binder at a
specific gravity of 1.01. Assume that these materials can be mixed and vibrated so
that the solid particles will touch each other, there are no voids in the binder, and the
particles occupy a minimum of space similar to the sketch of the cross section shown
here. It is desired to put 94 wt % of oxidizer into the propellant mix, for this will give
maximum performance. (a) Determine the maximum weight percentage of oxidizer if
only coarse crystals are used or if only medium-sized crystals are used. (b) Determine
the maximum weight of oxidizer if both coarse and fine crystals are used, with the
fine crystals filling the voids between the coarse particles. What is the optimum
relative proportion of coarse and fine particles to give a maximum of oxidizer? (c)
Same as part (b), but use coarse and medium crystals only. Is this better and, if so,
why? (d) Using all three sizes, what is the ideal weight mixture ratio and what is the
maximum oxidizer content possible and the theoretical maximum specific gravity of
516 SOLID PROPELLANTS
the propellant? (Hint: The centers of four adjacent coarse crystals form a tetrahedron
whose side length is equal to the diameter.)
2. Suggest one or two specific applications (intercontinental missile, anti-aircraft, space
launch vehicle upper stage, etc.) for each of the propellant categories listed in Table
12-2 and explain why it was selected when compared to other propellants.
3. Prepare a detailed outline of a procedure to be followed by a crew operating a
propellant mixer. This 1 m3 vertical solid propellant mixer has two rotating blades,
a mixing bowl, a vacuum pump system to allow mix operations under vacuum, feed
chutes or pipes with valves to supply the ingredients, and variable-speed electric
motor drive, a provision for removing some propellant for laboratory samples,
and a double-wall jacket around the mixing bowl to allow heating or cooling. It is
known that the composite propellant properties are affected by mix time, small
deviations from the exact composition, the temperature of the mix, the mechanical
energy added by the blades, the blade speed, and the sequence in which the ingre
dients are added. It is also known that bad propellant would be produced if there are
leaks that destroy the vacuum, if the bowl, mixing blades, feed chutes, and so on, are
not clean but contain deposits of old propellant on their walls, if they are not mixed
at 80°C, or if the viscosity of the mix becomes excessive. The sequence of loading
ingredients shall be: (I) prepolymer binder, (2) plasticizer, (3) minor liquid additives,
(4) solid consisting of first powdered aluminum and thereafter mixed bimodal AP
crystals, and (5) finally the polymerizing agent or crosslinker. Refer to Fig. 12-11.
Samples of the final liquid mix are taken to check viscosity and density. Please list all
the sequential steps that the crew should undertake before, during, and after the
mixing operation. If it is desired to control to a specific parameter (weight, duration,
etc.), that fact should be stated; however, the specific data of ingredient mass, time,
power, temperature, and so on, can be left blank. Mention all instruments (e.g.,
thermometers, wattmeter, etc.) that the crew should have and identify those that
they must monitor closely. Assume that all ingredients were found to be of the
desired composition, purity, and quality.
4. Determine the longitudinal growth of a 24-in.-long free-standing grain with a linear
thermal coefficient of expansion of 7.5 x 10-5/°F for temperature limits of -40 to
PROBLEMS 517
140°F.
Answer: 0.32 in.
5. The following data are given for an internally burning solid propellant grain with
inhibited end faces and a small initial port area:
Length 40 in.
Port area 27 in.2
Propellant weight 240 lb
Initial pressure at front end of chamber 1608 psi
Initial pressure at nozzle end of chamber 1412 psi
Propellant density 0.060 lb/in.3
Vehicle acceleration 21.2 g
0
Determine the initial forces on the propellant supports produced by pressure differ
ential and vehicle acceleration.
Answers: 19,600 !bf, 5090 !bf.
6. A solid propellant unit with an end-burning grain has a thrust of 4700 N and a
duration of 14 sec. Four different burning rate propellants are available, all with
approximately the same performance and the same specific gravity, but different AP
mix and sizes and different burning rate enhancements. They are 5.0, 7.0, 10, and 13
mm/sec. The preferred L/D is 2.60, but values of 2.2 to 3.5 are acceptable. The
impulse-to-initial-weight ratio is 96 at an L/D of 2.5. Assume optimum nozzle expan
sion. Chamber pressure is 6.894 MPa or 1000 psia and the operating temperature is
20°C or 68°F. Determine grain geometry, propellant mass, hardware mass, and
initial mass.
7. For the rocket in Problem 6 determine the approximate chamber pressure, thrust,
and duration at 245 and 328 K. Assume the temperature sensitivity (at a constant
value of Ab! A,) of 0.01 %/K does not change with temperature.
8. A fuel-rich solid propellant gas generator propellant is required to drive a turbine of
a liquid propellant turbopump. Determine its mass flow rate. The following data are
given:
Chamber pressure p = 5 MPa
1
Combustion temperature T = 1500 K
1
Specific heat ratio k = 1.25
Required pump input power 970 kW
Turbine outlet pressure 0 psia
Turbine efficiency 65%
Molecular weight of gas 22 kg/kg-mo!
Pressure drop between gas
generator and turbine
nozzle inlet 0.10 MPa
Windage and bearing friction is 10 kW. Neglect start transients.
Answer: ri1 = 0.257 kg/sec.
9. The propellant for this gas generator has these characteristics:
Burn rate at standard conditions 4.0 mm/sec
Burn time 110 sec
Chamber pressure 5.1 MPa
518 SOLID PROPELLANTS
Pressure exponent n 0.55
Propellant specific gravity 1.47
Determine the size of an end-burning cylindrical grain.
Answer: Single end-burning grain 27.2 cm in diameter and 31.9 cm long, or two end
burning opposed grains (each 19.6 cm diameter x 31.9 cm long) in a single chamber
with ignition of both grains in the middle of the case.
REFERENCES
12-1. A Davenas, "Solid rocket Motor Design," Chapter 4 ofG. E. Jensen and D. W.
Netzer (Eds.), Tactical Missile Propulsion, Vol. 170, Progress in Astronautics
and Aeronautics, AIAA, 1996.
12-2. N. Kubota, "Survey of Rocket Propellants and their Combustion
Characteristics," Chapter I in K. K. Kuo and M. Summerfield (Eds.),
Fundamentals of Solid-Propellant Combustion. Progress in Astronautics and
Aeronautics, Vol. 90, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
New York, 1984.
12-3. C. Boyars and K. Klager, Propellants: Manufacture, Hazards and Testing,
Advances in Chemistry Series 88, American Chemical Society, Washington,
DC, 1969.
12-4. Chemical Propulsion Information Agency, Hazards of Chemical Rockets and
Propellants. Vol. II, Solid Rocket Propellant Processing, Handling, Storage and
Transportation, NTIS AD-870258, May 1972.
12-5. H. S. Sibdeh and R. A. Heller, "Rocket Motor Service Life Calculations Based
on First Passage Method," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 26, No. 4,
July-August 1989, pp. 279-284.
12-6. D. I. Thrasher, "State of the Art of Solid Propellant Rocket Motor Grain
Design in the United States," Chapter 9 in Design Methods in Solid Rocket
Motors, Lecture Series LS 150, AGARD/NATO, April 1988.
12-7. "Explosive Hazard Classification Procedures," DOD, U.S. Army Technical
Bulletin TB 700-2, updated 1989 (will become a UN specification).
12-8. "Hazards Assessment Tests for Non-Nuclear Ordnance," Military Standard
MIL-STD-2105B (Government-issued Specification), 1994.
12-9. "Department of Defense-Ammunition and Explosive Safety Standard." U.S.
Department of Defense, U.S. Army TB 700-2, U.S. Navy NA VSEAINST
8020.8, U.S. Air Force TO l lA-1-47, Defense Logistics Agency DLAR
8220.1, 1994 rev.
12-10. G. M. Clark and C. A. Zimmerman, "Phase Stabilized Ammonium Nitrate
Selection and Development," JANNAF Publication 435, October 1985, pp.
65-75.
12-11. J. Li and Y. Xu, "Some Recent Investigations in Solid Propellant Technology
for Gas Generators," AIAA Paper 90-2335, July 1990.
12-12. S. Boraas, "Modeling Slag Deposition in the Space Shuttle Solid Motor,"
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 21, No. I, January-February 1984,
pp. 47-54.
REFERENCES 519
12-13. V. Lindner, "Explosives and Propellants," Kirk-Othmer, Encyclopedia of
Chemical Technology, Vol. 9, pp. 561-671, 1980.
12-14. J. A. McKinnis and A. R. O'Connell, "MX Launch Gas Generator
Development," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 20, No. 3, May-June
1983.
12-15. T. H. Vos and G. W. Goetz, "Inflatable Restraint Systems, Helping to Save
Lives on the Road," Quest, published by TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, CA, Vol.
12, No. 2, Winter 1989-1990, pp. 2-27.
12-16. A. Peretz, "Investigation of Pyrotechnic MTV Compositions for Rocket Motor
Igniters," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 21, No. 2, March-April 1984,
pp. 222-224.
12-17. G. Frut, "Mistral Missile Propulsion System," A/AA Paper 89-2428, July 1989
(B-KN0 ignition).
3
12-18. A. Davenas, Solid Rocket Propulsion Technology, Pergamon Press, 1993 (origin
ally published in French, 1988).
12-19. J. L. Laird and R. J. Baker, "A Novel Smokeless Non-flaking Solid Propellant
Inhibitor," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 2, No. 4, July-August 1986,
pp. 378-379.
12-20. M. Q. Brewster, "Radiation-Stagnation Flow Model of Aluminized Solid
Rocket Motor Insulation Heat Transfer," Journal of Thermophysics, Vol. 3,
No. 2, April 1989, pp. 132-139.
12-21. A. Truchot, "Design of Solid Rocket Motor Internal Insulation," Chapter 10 in
Design Methods in Solid Rocket Motors, Lecture Series LS 150, AGARD/
NATO, April 1988.
12-22. M. Probster and R. H. Schmucker, "Ballistic Anomalies in Solid Propellant
Motors Due to Migration Effects," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 13, No. 10, 1986,
pp. 599-605.
12-23. L. Chow and P. S. Shadlesky, "External Insulation for Tactical Missile Motor
Propulsion Systems," A/AA Paper 89-2425, July 1989.
12-24. W.W. Sobol, "Low Cost Manufacture of Tactical Rocket Motors," Proceedings
of 1984 JANNA F Propulsion Meeting, Vol. II, Chemical Propulsion Information
Agency, Johns Hopkins University, Columbia, MD, 1984, pp. 219-226.
CHAPTER 13
COMBUSTION OF SOLID
PROPELLANTS
This is the third of four chapters on solid propellant motors. We discuss the
combustion of solid propellants, the physical and chemical processes of burn
ing, the ignition or startup process, the extinction of burning, and combustion
instability.
The combustion process in rocket propulsion systems is very efficient, when
compared to other power plants, because the combustion temperatures are
very high; this accelerates the rate of chemical reaction, helping to achieve
nearly complete combustion. As was mentioned in Chapter 2, the energy
released in the combustion is between 95 and 99.5% of the possible maximum.
This is difficult to improve. There has been much interesting research on rocket
combustion and we have now a better understanding of the phenomena and of
the behavior of burning propellants. This combustion area is still the domain of
specialists. The rocket motor designers have been concerned not so much with
the burning process as with controlling the combustion (start, stop, heat
effects) and with preventing the occurrence of combustion instability.
13.1. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROCESSES
The combustion in a solid propellant motor involves exceedingly complex
reactions taking place in the solid, liquid, and gas phases of a heterogeneous
mixture. Not only are the physical and chemical processes occurring during
solid propellant combustion not fully understood, but the available analytical
combustion models remain oversimplified and unreliable. Experimental obser
vations of burning propellants show complicated three-dimensional micro-
520
13.1. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROCESSES 521
structures, a three-dimensional flame structure, intermediate products in the
liquid and gaseous phase, spatially and temporally variant processes, aluminum
agglomeration, nonlinear response behavior, formation of carbon particles, and
other complexities yet to be adequately reflected in mathematical models.
Some insight into this combustion process can be gained by understanding
the behavior of the major ingredients, such a ammonium perchlorate, which is
fairly well explored. This oxidizer is capable of self-deflagration with a low
pressure combustion limit at approximately 2 MPa, the existence of at least
four distinct "froth" zones of combustion between 2 and 70 MPa, the existence
of a liquid froth on the surface of the crystal during deflagration between 2 and
6 MPa, and a change in the energy-transfer mechanism (particularly at about
14 MPa). Its influence on combustion is critically dependent on oxidizer purity.
The surface regression rate ranges from 3 mm/sec at 299 K and 2 MPa to I 0
mm/sec at 423 K and 1.4 MPa.
The various polymeric binders used in composite propellants are less well
characterized and their combustion properties vary, depending on the binder
type, heating rate, and combustion chamber pressure.
The addition of powdered aluminum (2 to 40 µm) is known to favorably
influence specific impulse and combustion stability. Photography of the burn
ing aluminum particles shows that the particles usually collect into relatively
large accumulaties (100 or more particles) during the combustion process. The
combustion behavior of this ingredient depends on many variables, including
particle size and shape, surface oxides, the binder, and the combustion wave
environment. Ref. 13-1 describes solid propellant combustion.
Visual observations and measurements of flames in simple experiments, such
as strand burner tests, give an insight into the combustion process. For double
base propellants the combustion flame structure appears to be homogeneous
and one-dimensional along the burning direction, as shown in Fig. 13-1. When
heat from the combustion melts, decomposes, and vaporizes the solid propel
lant at the burning surface, the resulting gases seem to be already premixed.
One can see a brilliantly radiating bright flame zone where most of the chemical
reaction is believed to occur and a dark zone between the bright flame and the
burning surface. The brightly radiating hot reaction zone seems to be detached
from the combustion surface. The combustion that occurs inside the dark zone
does not emit strong radiations in the visible spectrum, but does emit in the
infrared spectral region. The dark zone thickness decreases with increasing
chamber pressure, and higher heat transfer to the burning surface causes the
burning rate to increase. Experiments on strand burners in an inert nitrogen
atmosphere, reported in Chapter I of Ref. 13-1, show this dramatically: for
pressures of I 0, 20, and 30 atm the dark zone thickness is 12, 3.3, and 1.4 mm,
respectively, and the corresponding burning rates are 2.2, 3.1, and 4.0 mm/sec.
The overall length of the visible flame becomes shorter as the chamber pressure
increases and the heat release per unit volume near the surface also increases.
In the bright, thin fizz zone or combustion zone directly over the burning
surface of the DB propellant, some burning and heat release occurs. Beneath
522 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
Typical
temperature ('C)
-~--End of visible flame
2000 '
Secondary (luminous)
combustion zone
very bright
800
-----,---Fuzzy interface
Induction zone or dark
zone - almost invisible
330-400 Primary combustion zone-visible
---+--
Burning surface
Degraded solid propellant zone
Preheated solid propellant zone
25
Unheated propellant
L Strand _,_J
1-burner1
width
FIGURE 13-1. Schematic diagram of the combustion flame structure of a double-base
propellant as seen with a strand burner in an inert atmosphere. (Adapted from Chapter
I of Ref. 13-1 with permission of the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, AIAA.)
is a zone of liquefied bubbling propellant which is thought to be very thin (less
than 1 µm) and which has been called the foam or degradation zone. Here the
temperature becomes high enough for the propellant molecules to vaporize and
break up or degrade into smaller molecules, such as N0 2, aldehydes, or NO,
which leave the foaming surface. Underneath is the solid propellant, but the
layer next to the surface has been heated by conduction within the solid pro
pellant material.
Burn rate catalysts seem to affect the primary combustion zone rather than
the processes in the condensed phase. They catalyze the reaction at or near the
surface, increase or decrease the heat input into the surface, and change the
amount of propellant that is burned.
A typical flame for an AP/Al/HTPB* propellant looks very different, as seen
in Fig. 13-2. Here the luminous flame seems to be attached to the burning
* Acronyms are explained in Tables 12-6 and 12-7.
13.1. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROCESSES 523
Visible flame length
:,...,.,..,__,.,..,,.,_,..-------1--
Burning surface
Degradation zone
Preheated zone
Unheated zone
r
Width of~
strand
burner
FIGURE 13--2. Diagram of the flickering, irregular combustion flame of a composite
propellant (69% AP, 19% Al, plus binder and additives) in a strand burner with a
neutral atmosphere. (Adapted from Chapter I of Ref. 13-1 with permission of AIAA.)
surface, even at low pressures. There is no dark zone. The oxidizer-rich decom
posed gases from the AP diffuse into the fuel-rich decomposed gases from the
fuel ingredients, and vice versa. Some solid particles (aluminum, AP crystals,
small pieces of binder, or combinations of these) break loose from the surface
and the particles continue to react and degrade while in the gas flow. The
burning gas contains liquid particles of hot aluminum oxides, which radiate
intensively. The propellant material and the burning surface are not homoge
neous. The flame structure is unsteady (flicker), three dimensional, not truly
axisymmetrical, and complex. The flame structure and the burning rates of
composite-modified cast double-base (CMDB) propellant with AP and Al
seem to approach those of composite propellant, particularly when the AP
content is high. Again there is no dark zone and the flame structure is unsteady
and not axisymmetrical. It also has a complex three-dimensional flame
structure.
According to Ref. 13-1, the flame structure for double-base propellant with
a nitramine addition shows a thin dark zone and a slightly luminous degrada
tion zone on the burning surface. The dark zone decreases in length with
increasd pressure. The decomposed gases of RDX or HMX are essentially
524 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
neutral (not oxidizing) when decomposed as pure ingredients. In this CMDB/
RDX propellant the degradation products of RDX solid crystals interdiffuse
with the gas from the DB matrix just above the burning surface, before the
RDX particles can produce monopropellant flamelets. Thus an essentially
homogeneous premixed gas flame is formed, even though the solid propellant
itself is heterogeneous. The flame structure appears to be one-dimensional. The
burning rate of this propellant decreases when the RDX percentage is increased
and seems to be almost unaffected by changes in RDX particle size. Much
work has been done to characterize the burning behavior of different propel
lants. See Chapters 2, 3, and 4 by Kishore and Gayathri, Boggs, and Fifer,
respectively, in Ref. 13-1, and Refs. 13-2 to 13-8.
The burning rate of all propellants is influenced by pressure (see Section 11.1
and Eq. 11-3), the initial ambient solid propellant temperature, the burn rate
catalyst, the aluminum particle sizes and their size distribution, and to a lesser
extent by other ingredients and manufacturing process variables. Erosive burn
ing is basically an accelerated combustion phenomenon stimulated by
increased heat transfer and erosion by local high velocities; this was discussed
briefly in Chapter 11. Analysis of combustion is treated later in this chapter.
13.2. IGNITION PROCESS
This section is concerned with the mechanism or the process for initiating the
combustion of a solid propellant grain. Specific propellants that have been
successfully used for igniters have been mentioned in Section 12.5. The hard
ware, types, design, and integration of igniters into the motor are described in
Section 14.4. Chapters 2, 5, and 6 of Ref. 13-1 review the state of the art of
ignition, data from experiments, and analytical models, which have been found
to be mostly unreliable.
Solid propellant ignition consists of a series of complex rapid events, which
start on receipt of a signal (usually electric) and include heat generation, trans
fer of the heat from the igniter to the motor grain surface, spreading the flame
over the entire burning surface area, filling the chamber free volume (cavity)
with gas, and elevating the chamber pressure without serious abnormalities
such as overpressures, combustion oscillations, damaging shock waves, hang
fires (delayed ignition), extinguishment, and chuffing. The igniter in a solid
rocket motor generates the heat and gas required for motor ignition.
Motor ignition must usually be complete in a fraction of a second for all but
the very large motors (see Ref. 13-9). The motor pressure rises to an equili
brium state in a very short time, as shown in Fig. 13-3. Conventionally, the
ignition process is divided into three phases for analytical purposes:
Phase I, Ignition time lag: the period from the moment the igniter receives a
signal until the first bit of grain surface burns.
13.2. IGNITION PROCESS 525
t-
Phase Ill
r, Phasell
-~ 800 I ', ..... r.__---------11600
C. I
~ I ------ -..... ·[
::, i
~"' 600 / J I ', Igniter pressure 1200 ~-
1
JC i . \tyrogen type)
~ 400 800
.s:::: \ ~
u
~ pressure I !!F
200 I 400
:::E
I
I
0 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 320
Time, milliseconds
FIGURE 13-3. Typical ignition pressure transient portion of motor chamber pressure
time trace with igniter pressure trace and ignition process phases shown. Electric signal
is received a few milliseconds before time zero.
Phase II, Flame-spreading interval: the time from first ignition of the grain
surface until the complete grain burning area has been ignited.
Phase III, Chamber-filling interval: the time for completing the chamber
filling process and for reaching equilibrium chamber pressure and flow.
The ignition will be successful once enough grain surface is ignited and
burning, so that the motor will continue to raise its own pressure to the oper
ating chamber pressure. The critical process seems to be a gas-phase reaction
above the burning surface, when propellant vapors or decomposition products
interact with each other and with the igniter gas products. If the igniter is not
powerful enough, some grain surfaces may burn for a short time, but the flame
will be extinguished.
Satisfactory attainment of equilibrium chamber pressure with full gas flow is
dependent on (I) characteristics of the igniter and the gas temperature, com
position and flow issuing from the igniter, (2) motor propellant composition
and grain surface ignitability, (3) heat transfer characteristics by radiation and
convection between the igniter gas and grain surface, (4) grain flame spreading
rate, and (5) the dynamics of filling the motor free volume with hot gas (see
Ref. 13-10). The quantity and type of caloric energy needed to ignite a parti
cular motor grain in the prevailing environment has a direct bearing on most of
the igniters' design parameters-particularly those affecting the required heat
output. The ignitability of a propellant at a given pressure and temperature is
normally shown as a plot of ignition time versus heat flux received by the
propellant surface, as shown in Fig. 13--4; these data are obtained from labora
tory tests. lgnitability of a propellant is affected by many factors, including (I)
the propellant formulation, (2) the initial temperature of the propellant grain
526 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
1.0
0.5
0.6
0.1
~ §
<I)
oi "'
E \ ~
:;:: 0.05 0.75 :,
:C 0
t
: \ < <f:I I) )'
C: 0..
..!:!' Deflagration limit'
line for a typical
double base propellant \
0.01 \ \501.0
0.005
10 20 40 60 80 100 120
Heat flux, cal/cm2-sec
FIGURE 13-4. Propellant ignitability curves: effect of heat flux on ignition time for a
specific motor.
surface, (3) the surrounding pressure, (4) the mode of heat transfer, (5) grain
surface roughness, (6) age of the propellant, (7) the composition and hot solid
particle content of the igniter gases, (8) the igniter propellant and its initial
temperature, (9) the velocity of the hot igniter gases relative to the grain sur
face, and (10) the cavity volume and configuration. Figure 13-4 and data in
Chapter 14 show that the ignition time becomes shorter with increases in both
heat flux and chamber pressure. If a short ignition delay is required, then a
more powerful igniter will be needed. The radiation effects can be significant in
the ignition transient as described in Ref. 13~1 l. In Section 14.3 we describe an
analysis and design for igniters.
13.3. EXTINCTION OR THRUST TERMINATION
Sometimes it is necessary to stop or extinguish the burning of a solid motor
before all the propellant has been consumed:
13.3. EXTINCTION OR THRUST TERMINATION 527
I. When a flight vehicle has reached the desired flight velocity (for a ballistic
missile to attain a predetermined velocity or for a satellite to achieve an
accurate orbit), or a precise total impulse cutoff is needed.
2. As a safety measure, when it appears that a flight test vehicle will unex
pectedly fly out of the safe boundaries of a flight test range facility.
3. To avoid collisions of stages during a stage separation maneuver (requir
ing a thrust reversal) for multistage flight vehicles.
4. During research and development testing, when one wants to examine a
partially burned motor.
The common mechanisms for achieving extinction are listed below and
described in Chapters 2, 5, and 6 of Ref. 13-1.
I. Very rapid depressurization, usually by a sudden, large increase of the
nozzle throat area or by fast opening of additional gas escape areas or
ports. The most common technique neutralizes the thrust or reverses the
net thrust direction by suddenly opening exhaust ports in the forward
end of the motor case. Such a thrust reversal using ports located on the
forward bulkhead of the case is achieved in the upper stages of
Minuteman and Poseidon missiles. This is done by highly predictable
and reproducible explosive devices which suddenly open additional gas
escape areas (thus causing pressure reduction) and neutralize the thrust
by exhausting gases in a direction opposite to that of the motor nozzle.
To balance side forces, the thrust termination blow-out devices and their
ducts are always designed in symmetrically opposed sets (two or more).
In Fig. 1-5 there are four symmetrically placed openings that are blown
into the forward dome of the case by circular explosive cords. Two of the
sheathed circular cord assemblies are sketched on the outside of the
forward dome wall. The ducts that lead the hot gas from these openings
to the outside of the vehicle are not shown in this figure. The forward
flow of gas occurs only for a very brief period of time, during which the
thrust is actually reversed. The rapid depressurization causes a sudden
stopping of the combustion at the propellant burning surface. With
proper design the explosive cords do not cause a detonation or explosion
of the remaining unburned propellant.
2. During some motor development projects it can be helpful to see a par
tially consumed grain. The motor operation is stopped when the flames
are quenched by injecting an inhibiting liquid such as water. Reference
13-12 shows that adding a detergent to the water allows a better contact
with the burning surface and reduces the amount of water needed for
quenching.
3. Lowering the combustion pressure below the pressure deflagration limit.
Compared to item 1, this depressurization occurs quite slowly. Many
solid propellants have a low-pressure combustion limit of 0.05 to 0.15
528 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
MPa. This means that some propellants will not extinguish when vented
during a static sea-level test at 1 atm (0.1 MPa) but will stop burning if
vented at high altitude.
A sudden depressurization is effective because the primary combustion zone
at the propellant surface has a time lag compared to the gaseous combustion
zone which, at the lower pressure, quickly adjusts to a lower reaction rate and
moves farther away from the burning surface. The gases created by the vapor
ization and pyrolysis of the hot solid propellant cannot all be consumed in a
gas reaction close to the surface, and some will not burn completely. As a
result, the heat transfer to the propellant surface will be quickly reduced by
several orders of magnitude, and the reaction at the propellant surface will
diminish and stop. Experimental results (Chapter 12 of Ref. 13-1) show that
a higher initial combustion pressure requires a faster depressurization rate
(dp/dt) to achieve extinction.
13.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY
There seem to be two types of combustion instability: a set of acoustic reso
nances or pressure oscillations, which can occur with any rocket motor, and a
vortex shedding phenomenon, which occurs only with particular types of
grams.
Acoustic Instabilities
When a solid propellant rocket motor experiences unstable combustion, the
pressure in the interior gaseous cavities (made up by the volume of the port or
perforations, fins, slots, conical or radial groves) oscillates by at least 5% and
often by more than 30% of the chamber pressure. When instability occurs, the
heat transfer to the burning surfaces, the nozzle, and the insulated case walls is
greatly increased; the burning rate, chamber pressure, and thrust usually
increase; but the burning duration is thereby decreased. The change in the
thrust-time profile causes significant changes in the flight path, and at times
this can lead to failure of the mission. If prolonged and if the vibration energy
level is high, the instability can cause damage to the hardware, such as over
heating the case and causing a nozzle or case failure. Instability is a condition
that should be avoided and must be carefully investigated and remedied if it
occurs during a motor development program. Final designs of motors must be
free of such instability.
There are fundamental differences with liquid propellant combustion beha
vior. In liquid propellants there is a fixed chamber geometry with a rigid wall;
liquids in feed systems and in injectors that are not part of the oscillating gas in
the combustion chamber can interact strongly with the pressure fluctuations. In
solid propellant motors the geometry of the oscillating cavity increases in size
13.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 529
as burning proceeds and there are stronger damping factors, such as solid
particles and energy-absorbing viscoelastic materials. In general, combustion
instability problems do not occur frequently or in every motor development,
and, when they do occur, it is rarely the cause for a drastic sudden motor
failure or disintegration. Nevertheless, drastic failures have occurred.
Undesirable oscillations in the combustion cavity propellant rocket motors
is a continuing problem in the design, development, production, and even long
term (10 yr) retention of solid rocket missiles. While acoustically "softer" than
a liquid rocket combustion chamber, the combustion cavity of a solid propel
lant rocket is still a low-loss acoustical cavity containing a very large acoustical
energy source, the combustion process itself. A small fraction of the energy
released by combustion is more than sufficient to drive pressure vibrations to
an unacceptable level.
Combustion instability can occur spontaneously, often at some particular
time during the motor burn period, and the phenomenon is usually repeatable
in identical motors. Both longitudinal and transverse waves (radial and tan
gential) can occur. Figure 13-5 shows a pressure-time profile with typical
instability. The pressure oscillations increase in magnitude, and the thrust
and burning rate also increase. The frequency seems to be a function of the
cavity geometry, propellant composition, pressure, and internal flame field. As
l"
:::,
"'
"'
l"
0...
Burning time
FIGURE 13-5. Simplified diagram showing two periods of combustion instability in
the pressure-time history, with enlargements of two sections of this curve. The dashed
lines show the upper and lower boundaries of the high-frequency pressure oscillations,
and the dot-dash curve is the behavior without instability after a slight change in
propellant formulation. The vibration period shows a rise in the mean pressure. With
vibration, the effective burning time is reduced and the average thrust is higher. The
total impulse is essentially unchanged.
530 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
the internal grain cavity is enlarged and local velocities change, the oscillation
often abates and disappears. The time and severity of the combustion vibration
tend to change with the ambient grain temperature prior to motor operation.
For a simple grain with a cylindrical port area, the resonant transverse
mode oscillations (tangential and radial) correspond roughly to those shown
in Fig. 9--4 for liquid propellant thrust chambers. The longitudinal or axial
modes, usually at a lower frequency, are an acoustic wave traveling parallel
to the motor axis between the forward end of the perforation and the con
vergent nozzle section. Harmonic frequencies of these basic vibration modes
can also be excited. The internal cavities can become very complex and can
include igniter cases, movable as well as submerged nozzles, fins, cones, slots,
star-shaped perforations, or other shapes, as described in the section on grain
geometry in Chapter 11; determination of the resonant frequencies of com
plex cavities is not always easy. Furthermore, the geometry of the internal
resonating cavity changes continually as the burning propellant surfaces
recede; as the cavity volume becomes larger, the transverse oscillation fre
quencies are reduced.
The bulk mode, also known as the Helmholtz mode, L * mode, or chuffing
mode, is not a wave mode as described above. It occurs at relatively low
frequencies (typically below 150 Hz and sometimes below I Hz), and the
pressure is essentially uniform throughout the volume. The unsteady velocity
is close to zero, but the pressure rises and falls. It is the gas motion (in and out
of the nozzle) that corresponds to the classical Helmholtz resonator mode,
similar to exciting a tone when blowing across the open mouth of a bottle
(see Fig. 9-7). It occurs at low values of L * (see Eq. 8-9), sometimes during
the ignition period, and disappears when the motor internal volume becomes
larger or the chamber pressure becomes higher. Chuffing is the periodic low
frequency discharge of a bushy, unsteady flame of short duration (typically less
than I sec) followed by periods of no visible flame, during which slow out
gassing and vaporization of the solid propellant accumulates hot gas in the
chamber. The motor experiences spurts of combustion and consequent pres
sure buildup followed by periods of nearly ambient pressure. This dormant
period can extend for a fraction of a second to a few seconds (Ref. 13-13 and
Chapter 13 by Price in Ref. 13-1 ).
A useful method of visualizing unstable pressure waves is shown in Figs. 9-5
and 13-6 and Ref. 13-14. It consists of a series of Fourier analyses of the
measured pressure vibration spectrum, each taken at a different time in the
burning duration and displayed at successive vertical positions on a time scale,
providing a map of amplitude versus frequency versus burning time. This figure
shows a low-frequency axial mode and two tangential modes, whose frequency
is reduced in time by the enlargement of the cavity; it also shows the timing of
different vibrations, and their onset and demise.
The initiation or triggering of a particular vibration mode is still not well
understood but has to do with energetic combustion at the propellant surface.
A sudden change in pressure is known to be a trigger, such as when a piece of
13.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 531
\
\ First
1 tangential
""" mode
~
~ 1
I
1,,'.
A
t 1
~ \
,-A l. \
Cl)
iE = Jl ~ ~
.A First \
\
longitudinal \
),.. mode
t ~
Second ~
tangential
1' mode "-
I
Frequency -
FIGURE 13--6. Example of mode frequency display; also called a "waterfall" diagram
of a motor firing. Only four complete time-frequency curves are shown; for easy visua
lization the other time lines are partly omitted except near the resonating frequencies.
The height of the wave is proportional to pressure. As the cavity volume increases, the
frequencies of the transverse modes decrease. (Adapted from E.W. Price, Chapter 13 of
Ref. 13-1, with permission of AIAA.)
broken-off insulation or unburned propellant flows through the nozzle and
temporarily blocks all or a part of the nozzle area (causing a momentary
pressure rise).
The shifting balance between amplifying and damping factors changes dur
ing the burning operation and this causes the growth and also the abatement of
specific modes of vibration. The response of a solid propellant describes the
change in the gas mass production or energy release at the burning surface
when it is stimulated by pressure perturbations. When a momentary high
pressure peak occurs on the surface, it increases the instantaneous heat transfer
and thus the burning rate, causing the mass flow from that surface to also
increase. Velocity perturbations along the burning surface are also believed to
cause changes in mass flow. Phenomena that contribute to amplifying the
vibrations, or to gains in the acoustic energy (see Ref. 13-1, Chapter 13 by
Price), are:
1. The dynamic response of the combustion process to a flow disturbance or
the oscillations in the burning rate. This combustion response can be
532 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
determined from tests of T-burners as described on pages 533 and 534.
The response function depends on the frequency of these perturbations
and the propellant formulation. The combustion response may not be in
a phase with the disturbance. The effects of boundary layers on velocity
perturbations have been investigated in Ref. 13-15.
2. The interactions of flow oscillation with the main flow, similar to the
basis for the operation of musical wind instruments or sirens (see Ref.
13-16).
3. The fluid dynamic influence of vortexes.
Phenomena that contribute to a diminishing of vibration or to damping are
energy-absorbing processes; they include the following:
I. Viscous damping in the boundary layers at the walls or propellant sur
faces.
2. Damping by particles or droplets flowing in an oscillating gas/vapor flow
is often substantial. The particles accelerate and decelerate by being
"dragged" along by the motion of the gas, a viscous flow process that
absorbs energy. The attenuation for each particular vibration frequency
is an optimum at a particular size of particles; high damping for low
frequency oscillation (large motors) occurs with relatively large solid
particles (8 to 20 µm); for small motors or high-frequency waves the
best damping occurs with small particles (2 to 6 µm). The attenuation
drops off sharply if the particle size distribution in the combustion gas is
not concentrated near the optimum for damping.
3. Energy from longitudinal and mixed transverse/longitudinal waves is lost
out through the exhaust nozzle. Energy from purely transverse waves
does not seem to be damped by this mechanism.
4. Acoustic energy is absorbed by the viscoelastic solid propellant, insula
tor, and the motor case; its magnitude is difficult to estimate.
The propellant characteristics have a strong effect on the susceptibility to
instability. Changes in the binder, particle-size distribution, ratio of oxidizer to
fuel, and burn-rate catalysts can all affect stability, often in ways that are not
predictable. All solid propellants can experience instability. As a part of char
acterizing a new or modified propellant (e.g., determining its ballistic, mechan
ical, aging, and performance characteristics), many companies now also
evaluate it for its stability behavior, as described below.
Analytical Models and Simulation of Combustion Stability
Many interesting investigations have been aimed at mathematical models that
will simulate the combustion behavior of solid propellants. This was reviewed
by T'ien in Chapter 14 of Ref 13-1.
13.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 533
Using complex algorithms and computers it has been possible to successfully
simulate the combustion for some limited cases, such as for validating or
extrapolating experimental results or making limited predictions of the stability
of motor designs. This applies to well-characterized propellants, where empiri
cal constants (such as propellant response or particle-size distribution) have
been determined and where the range of operating parameters, internal geo
metries, or sizes has been narrow. The analytical methods used to date have by
themselves not been satisfactory to a motor designer. It is unlikely that a
reliable simple analysis will be found for predicting the occurrence, severity,
nature, and location of instability for a given propellant and motor design. The
physical and chemical phenomena are complex, multidimensional, unsteady,
nonlinear, influenced by many variables, and too difficult to emulate mathe
matically without a good number of simplifying assumptions. However, theo
retical analysis gives insight into the physical phenomena, can be a valuable
contributor to solving instability problems, and has been used for preliminary
design evaluation of grain cavities.
Combustion Stability Assessment, Remedy, and Design
In contrast with liquid rocket technology, an accepted combustion stability
rating procedure does not now exist for full-scale solid rockets. Undertaking
stability tests on large full-scale flight-hardware rocket motors is expensive, and
therefore lower-cost methods, such as subscale motors, T-burners, and other
test equipment, have been used to assess motor stability.
The best known and most widely used method of gaining combustion sta
bility-related data is the use of a T-burner, an indirect, limited method that does
not use a full-scale motor. Figure 13-7 is a sketch of a standard T-burner; it has
a 1.5-in. internal diameter double-ended cylindrical burner vented at its mid
point (see Refs. 13-17 to 13-19). Venting can be through a sonic nozzle to the
atmosphere or by a pipe connected to a surge tank which maintains a constant
level of pressure in the burner cavity. T-burner design and usage usually con
centrate on the portion of the frequency spectrum dealing with the transverse
oscillations expected in a full-scale motor. The desired acoustical frequency, to
be imposed on the propellant charge as it burns, determines the burner length
(distance between closed ends).
The nozzle location, midway between the ends of the burner, minimizes
attentuation of fundamental longitudinal mode oscillations (in the propellant
grain cavity). Theoretically, an acoustic pressure node exists at the center and
antinodes occur at the ends of the cavity. Acoustic velocity nodes are out of
phase with pressure waves and occur at the ends of the burner. Propellant
charges are often in the shape of discs or cups cemented to the end faces of
the burner. The gas velocity in the burner cavity is kept intentionally low
(Mach 0.2 or less) compared with the velocity in a full-scale motor. This
practice minimizes the influence of velocity-coupled energy waves and allows
the influence of pressure-coupled waves to be more clearly recognized.
534 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
Igniter wires
p
V
p
V
p
V
Third
FIGURE 13-7. Standard T-burner and its longitudinal mode standing waves (pressure
and velocity).
Use of the T-burner for assessing the stability of a full-scale solid rocket
presupposes valid theoretical models of the phenomena occurring in both the
T-burner and the actual rocket motor; these theories are still not fully vali
dated. In addition to assessing solid rocket motor combustion stability, the T
hurner also is used to evaluate new propellant formulations and the importance
of seemingly small changes in ingredients, such as a change in aluminum
powder particle size and oxidizer grind method.
Once an instability has been observed or predicted in a given motor, the
motor design has to fix the problem. There is no sure method for selecting the
right remedy, and none of the cures suggested below may work. The usual
alternatives are:
I. Changing the grain geometry to shift the frequencies away from the
undesirable values. Sometimes, changing fin locations, port cross-section
profile, or number of slots has been successful.
13.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 535
2. Changing the propellant composition. Using aluminum as an additive
has been most effective in curing transverse instabilities, provided that
the particle-size distribution of the aluminum oxide is favorable to opti
mum damping at the distributed frequency. Changing size distribution
and using other particulates (Zr, Al 20 3, or carbon particles) has been
effective in some cases. Sometimes changes in the binder have worked.
3. Adding some mechanical device for attenuating the unsteady gas motions
or changing the natural frequency of cavities. Various inert resonance
rods, baffles, or paddles have been added, mostly as a fix to an existing
motor with observed instability. They can change the resonance frequen
cies of the cavities, introduce additional viscous surface losses, but also
cause extra inert mass and potential problems with heat transfer or ero
sion.
Combustion instability has to be addressed during the design process,
usually through a combination of some mathematical simulation, understand
ing similar problems in other motors, studies of possible changes, and sup
porting experimental work (e.g., T-burners, measuring particle-size
distribution). Most solid propellant rocket companies have in-house two
and three-dimensional computer programs to calculate the likely acoustic
modes (axial, tangential, radial, and combinations of these) for a given
grain/motor, the initial and intermediate cavity geometries, and the combus
tion gas properties calculated from thermochemical analysis. Data on com
bustion response (dynamic burn rate behavior) and damping can be obtained
from T-burner tests. Data on particle sizes can be estimated from prior
experience or plume measurements (Ref. 13-20). Estimates of nozzle losses,
friction, or other damping need to be included. Depending on the balance
between gain and damping, it may be possible to arrive at conclusions on the
grain's propensity to instability for each specific instability mode that is
analyzed. If unfavorable, either the grain geometry or the propellant usually
have to be modified. If favorable, full-scale motors have to be built and
tested to validate the predicted stable burning characteristics. There is always
a trade-off between the amount of work spent on extensive analysis, subscale
experiments and computer programs (which will not always guarantee a
stable motor), and taking a chance that a retrofit will be needed after full
scale motors have been tested. If the instability is not discovered until after
the motor is in production, it is often difficult, time consuming, and expensive
to fix the problem.
Vortex-Shedding Instability
This instability is associated with burning on the inner surfaces of slots in the
grain. Large segmented rocket motors have slots between segments, and some
grain configurations have slots that intersect the centerline of the grain. Figure
13-8 shows that hot gases from the burning slot surfaces enter the main flow in
536 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
- Slot
Upstream Downstream
segment segment
Vortices
Streamlines of gas flow
Grain with step Grain
Streamlines of gas flow
FIGURE 13-8. Simple sketches of four partial grain sections each with a slot or a step.
Heavy lines identify the burning surfaces. The flow patterns cause the formation of
vortices. The shedding of these vortices can induce flow oscillations and pressure
instabilities.
the perforation or central cavity of the grain. The hot gas from the slot is
turned into a direction toward the nozzle. The flow from the side stream
restricts the flow emanating from the upstream side of the perforation and,
in effect, reduces the port area. This restriction causes the upstream port pres
sure to rise; sometimes there is a substantial pressure rise. The interaction of
the two subsonic gas flows causes turbulence. Vortices form and are periodi
cally shed or allowed to flow downstream, thereby causing an unstable flow
pattern. The vortex shedding patterns can interact with the acoustic instabil
ities. Reference 13-21 gives a description and Ref. 13-22 a method for analyz
ing these vortex-shedding phenomena. The remedy usually is to apply
inhibitors to some burning surfaces or to change the grain geometry; for exam
ple, by increasing the width of the slot, the local velocities are reduced and the
vortices become less pronounced.
REFERENCES 537
PROBLEMS
1. (a) Calculate the length of a T-burner to give a first natural oscillation of 2000 Hz
using a propellant that has a combustion temperature of 2410 K, a specific heat
ratio of 1.25, a molecular weight of 25 kg/kg-mo!, and a burning rate of 10.0 mm/
sec at a pressure of 68 atm. The T-burner is connected to a large surge tank and
prepressurized with nitrogen gas to 68 atm. The propellant disks are 20 mm thick.
Make a sketch to indicate the T-burner dimensions, including the disks.
(b) If the target frequencies are reached when the propellant is 50% burned, what
will be the frequency at propellant burnout?
Answers: (a) Length before applying propellant = 0.270 m; (b) frequency at burnout
= 1854 Hz.
2. An igniter is needed for a rocket motor similar to one shown in Fig. 11-1. Igniters
have been designed by various oversimplified design rules such as Fig. 13-3. The
motor has an internal grain cavity volume of 0.055 m3 and an initial burning surface
of 0.72 n/. The proposed igniter propellant has these characteristics: combustion
temperature 2500 Kand an energy release of about 40 J/kg-sec. Calculate the mini
mum required igniter propellant mass (a) if the cavity has to be pressurized to about
2 atm (ignore heat losses); (b) if only 6% of the igniter gas energy is absorbed at the
burning surface, and it requires about 20 cal/cm2 -sec to ignite in about 0.13 sec.
3. Using the data from Fig. 13-4, plot the total heat flux absorbed per unit area
versus pressure to achieve ignition with the energy needed to ignite being just
above the deflagration limit. Then, for 0.75 atm, plot the total energy needed versus
ignition time. Give a verbal interpretation of the results and trend for each of the
two curves.
REFERENCES
13-1. N. Kubota, "Survey of Rocket Propellants and Their Combustion
Characteristics," Chapter I; K. Kishore and V. Gayathri, "Chemistry of
Ignition and Combustion cf Ammonium-Perchlorate-Based Propellants,"
Chapter 2; T. L. Boggs, "The Thermal Behavior of Cyclotrimethylene
Trinitrate (RDX) and Cyclotetramethylene Tetranitrate (HMX)," Chapter 3;
R. A. Fifer, "Chemistry of Nitrnte Ester and Nitramine Propellants," Chapter
4; C. E. Hermance, "Solid Propellant Ignition Theories and Experiments,"
Chapter 5; M. Kumar and K. K. Kuo, "Flame Spreading and Overall
Ignition Transient," Chapter 6; E. W. Price, "Experimental Observations of
Combustion Instability," Chapter 13; James S. T'ien, "Theoretical Analysis of
Combustion Instability," Chapter 14; all in K. K. Kuo and M. Summerfield
(Eds), Fundamentals of Solid-Propellant Combustion, Volume 90 of Progress in
Astronautics and Aeronautics, American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, New York, 1984.
13-2. V. Duterque and G. Lengelle, "Combustion Mechanism of Nitramine-Based
Propellant with Additives," A/AA Paper 88-3253, July 1988.
538 COMBUSTION OF SOLID PROPELLANTS
13-3. C. Youfang, "Combustion Mechanism of Double-Base Propellants with Lead
Burning Rate Catalyst," Propellants, Explosives, Pyrotechnics, Vol. 12, 1987, pp.
209-214.
13-4. N. Kubota et al., "Combustion Wave Structures of Ammonium Perchlorate
Composite Propellants," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 2, No. 4,
July-August 1986, pp. 296--300.
13-5. T. Boggs, D. E. Zurn, H. F. Cordes, and J. Covino, "Combustion of
Ammonium Perchlorate and Various Inorganic Additives," Journal of
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 4, No. I, January-February 1988, pp. 27-39.
13-6. T. Kuwahara and N. Kubota, "Combustion of RDX/AP Composite
Propellants at Low Pressure," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 21, No.
5, September-October 1984, pp. 502-507.
13-7. P. A. 0. G. Korting, F. W. M. Zee, and J. J. Meulenbrugge, "Combustion
Characteristics of Low Flame Temperature, Chlorine-Free Composite
Propellants," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 6, No. 3, May-June 1990,
pp. 250--255.
13-8. N. Kubota and S. Sakamoto, "Combustion Mechanism ofHMX," Propellants,
Explosives, Pyrotechnics, Vol. 14, 1989, pp. 6--11.
13-9. L. H. Caveny, K. K. Kuo, and B. J. Shackleford, "Thrust and Ignition
Transients of the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster Motor," Journal of
Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 17, No. 6, November-December 1980, pp. 489-
494.
13-10. "Solid Rocket Motor Igniters," NASA SP-8051, March 1971 (N71-30346).
13-11. I. H. Cho and S. W. Baek, "Numerical Simulation of Axisymmetric Solid
Rocket Motor Ignition with Radiation Effect," Journal of Propulsion and
Power, Vol. 16, No. 4, July-August 2000, pp. 725-728.
13-12. J.Yin and B. Zhang, "Experimental Study of Liquid Quenching of Solid Rocket
Motors," A/AA Paper 90-2091.
13-13. B. N. Raghunandam and P. Bhaskariah, "Some New Results of Chuffing in
Composite Solid Propellant Rockets," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol.
22, No. 2, March-April 1985, pp. 218-220.
13-14. P. M. J. Hughes and E. Cerny, "Measurement and Analysis of High Frequency
Pressure Oscillations in Solid Rocket Motors," Journal of Spacecraft and
Rockets, Vol. 21, No. 3, May-June 1984, pp. 261-265.
13-15. R. A. Beddini and T. A. Roberts, "Response of Solid Propellant Combustion to
the Presence of a Turbulent Acoustic Boundary Layer," A/AA Paper 88-2942,
1988.
13-16. F. Vuillot and G. Avalon, "Acoustic-Mean Flow Interaction in Solid Rocket
Motors, Using Navier-Stokes Equations," A/AA Paper 88-2940, 1988.
13-17. W. C. Andrepont and R. J. Schoner, "The T-Burner Method for
Determining the Combustion Response of Solid Propellants," A/AA Paper
72-1053, 1972.
13-18. E.W. Price, H.B. Mathes, 0. H. Madden, and B. G. Brown, "Pulsed T-Burner
Testing of Combustion Dynamics of Aluminized Solid Propellants,"
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Vol. 10, No. 4, April 1971, pp. 65-69.
REFERENCES 539
13-19. R. L. Coates, "Application of the T-Burner to Ballistic Evaluation of New
Propellants," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 3, No. 12, December
1966, pp. 1793-1796.
13-20. E. D. Youngborg, J. E. Pruitt, M. J. Smith, and D. W. Netzer, "Light
Diffraction Particle Size Measurements in Small Solid Propellant Rockets,"
Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 6, No. 3, May-June 1990, pp. 243-249.
13-21. F. Vuillot, "Vortex Shedding Phenomena in Solid Rocket Motors," Journal of
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 11, No. 4, 1995.
13-22. A. Kourta, "Computation of Vortex Shedding in Solid Rocket Motors using a
Time-Dependent Turbulence Model," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 15,
No. 3, May-June 1999.
CHAPTER 14
SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND
MOTOR DESIGN
This is the last of four chapters on solid propellant rockets. We describe the key
inert components of solid propellant rocket motors, namely the motor case,
nozzle, and igniter case, and then discuss the design of motors. Although the
thrust vector control mechanism is also a component of many rocket motors, it
is described separately in Chapter 16. The key to the success of many of these
components is new materials which have been developed in recent years.
14.1. MOTOR CASE
The case not only contains the propellant grain, but also serves as a highly
loaded pressure vessel. Case design and fabrication technology has progressed
to where efficient and reliable motor cases can be produced consistently for any
solid rocket application. Most problems arise when established technology is
used improperly or from improper design analysis, understating the require
ments, or improper material and process control, including the omission of
nondestructive tests at critical points in the fabrication process. Case design is
usually governed by a combination of motor and vehicle requirements. Besides
constituting the structural body of the rocket motor with its nozzle, propellant
grain, and so on, the case frequently serves also as the primary structure of the
missile or launch vehicle. Thus the optimization of a case design frequently
entails trade-offs between case design parameters and vehicle design
parameters. Often, case design is influenced by assembly and fabrication
requirements.
540
14.1. MOTOR CASE 541
Table 14-1 lists many of the types of loads and their sources; they must be
considered at the beginning of a case design. Only some of them apply to any
one rocket motor application. In addition, the environmental conditions pecu
liar to a specific motor and its usage must be carefully considered. Typically,
these conditions include the following: (I) temperature (internal heating, aero
dynamic heating, temperature cycling during storage, or thermal stresses and
strains); (2) corrosion (moisture/chemical, galvanic, stress corrosion, or hydro
gen embrittlement); (3) space conditions: vacuum or radiation.
Three classes of materials have been used: high-strength metals (such as
steel, aluminum, or titanium alloys), wound-filament reinforced plastics, and
a combination of these in which a metal case has externally wound filaments
for extra strength. Table 14-2 gives a comparison of several typical materials.
For filament-reinforced materials it gives the data not only for the composite
material, but also for several strong filaments and a typical binder. The
strength-to-density ratio is higher for composite materials, which means that
they have less inert mass. Even though there are some important disadvan
tages, the filament-wound cases with a plastic binder are usually superior on a
vehicle performance basis. Metal cases combined with an external filament
wound reinforcement and spiral-wound metal ribbons glued together with
plastic have also been successful.
The shape of the case is usually determined from the grain configuration or
from geometric vehicle constraints on length or diameter. The case configura
tions range from long and thin cylinders (L/ D of 10) to spherical or near-
TABLE 14-1. Rocket Motor Case Loads
Origin of Load Type of Load/Stress
Internal pressure Tension biaxial, vibration
Axial thrust Axial, vibration
Motor nozzle Axial, bending, shear
Thrust vector control actuators Axial, bending, shear
Thrust termination equipment Biaxial, bending
Aerodynamic control surfaces or wings Tension, compression, bending, shear,
mounted to case torsion
Staging Bending, shear
Flight maneuvering Axial, bending, shear, torsion
Vehicle mass and wind forces on launch Axial, bending, shear
pad
Dynamic loads from vehicle oscillations Axial, bending, shear
Start pressure surge Biaxial
Ground handling, including lifting Tension, compression, bending, shear,
torsion
Ground transport Tension, compression, shear, vibration
Earthquakes (large motors) Axial, bending, shear
542 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
TABLE 14-2. Physical Properties of Selected Solid Propellant Motor Case Materials
at 20°c
Tensile Modulus of Strength
Strength, Elasticity, Density, to Density
N/mm2 N/mm2 g/cm3 Ratio
Material (103 psi) (106 psi) (lbm/in.3 ) (1000)
Filaments
E-glass 1930-3100 72,000 2.5 1040
(280-450) (I 0.4) (0.090)
Aramid 3050-3760 124,000 1.44
(Kevlar 49) (370-540) (18.0) (0.052) 2300
Carbon fiber or 3500-6900 230,000-300,000 1.53-1.80 2800
graphite fibers (500-1000) (33-43) (0.055-0.065)
Binder ( by itself)
Epoxy 83 2800 1.19 70
(12) (0.4) (0.043)
Filament-Reinforced Composite Material
E Glass 1030 35,000 1.94 500
(150-170) (4.6-5.0) (0.070)
Kevlar 49 1310 58,000 1.38 950
(190) (8.4) (0.050)
Graphite IM 2300 102,000 1.55 1400
(250-340) (14.8) (0.056)
Metals
Titanium alloy 1240 110,000 4.60 270
(180) (16) (0.166)
Alloy steel 1400-2000 207,000 7.84 205
(heat treated) (200-290) (30) (0.289)
Aluminum 455 72,000 2.79 165
alloy 2024 (66) (10.4) (0.101)
(heat treated)
Source: Data adapted in part from Chapter 4A by Evans and Chapter 7 by Scippa of Ref. 11-1.
spherical geometries (see Figs. 1-5, 11-1 to 11-4, and 11-17). The spherical
shape gives the lowest case mass per unit of enclosed volume. The case is often
a key structural element of the vehicle and it sometimes has to provide for
mounting of other components, such as fins, skirts, electric conduits, or thrust
vector control actuators. The propellant mass fractions of the motor are
usually strongly influenced by the case mass and typically range from 0. 70 to
0.94. The higher values apply to upper stage motors. For small-diameter
14.1. MOTOR CASE 543
motors the mass fraction is lower, because of practical wall thicknesses and the
fact that the wall surface area (which varies roughly as the square of the
diameter) to chamber volume (which varies roughly as the cube of diameter)
is less favorable in small sizes. The minimum thickness is higher than would be
determined from simple stress analysis; for a a fiber composite case it is two
layers of filament strands and the minimum metal thickness is dictated by
manufacturing and handling considerations.
Simple membrane theory can be used to predict the approximate stress in
solid propellant rocket chamber cases; this assumes no bending in the case
walls and that all the loads are taken in tension. For a simple cylinder of radius
R and thickness d, with a chamber pressure p, the longitudinal stress a is one
1
half of the tangential or hoop stress a 8:
= =
a 2a pR/d (14-1)
8 1
For a cylindrical case with hemispherical ends, the cylinder wall has to be twice
as thick as the walls of the end closures.
The combined stress should not exceed the working stress of the wall mate
rial. As the rocket engine begins to operate, the internal pressure p causes a
growth of the chamber in the longitudinal as well as in the circumferential
direction, and these deformations must be considered in designing the support
of the motor or propellant grain. Let Ebe Young's modulus of elasticity, v be
Poisson's ratio (0.3 for steel), and d be the wall thickness; then the growth in
length L and in diameter D due to pressure can be expressed as
pLD a1L
!1L = -(! - 2v) = -(! - 2v) (14-2)
4Ed E
2 i) a;: ( i)
!1D = ~~d ( I - = I - (14-3)
Details can be found in a text on thin shells or membranes. For a hemispherical
chamber end, the stress in each of two directions at right angles to each other is
equal to the longitudinal stress of a cylinder of identical radius. For ellipsoidal
end-chamber closures, the local stress varies with the position along the sur
face, and the maximum stress is larger than that of a hemisphere. The radial
displacement of a cylinder end is not the same as that of a hemispherical or
ellipsoidal closure if computed by thin-shell theory. Thus a discontinuity exists
which causes some shearing and bending stresses. Similarly, a boss for the
attachment of an igniter, a pressure gauge, or a nozzle can make it necessary
for bending and shear stresses to be superimposed on the simple tension stres
ses of the case. In these locations it is necessary to reinforce or thicken the
chamber wall locally.
Finite element computerized stress analysis programs exist and are used in
motor design companies today to determine the case design configuration with
reasonable stress values. This analysis must be done simultaneously with the
544 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
stress analysis on the grain (since it imposes loads on the case), and with a finite
element thermal analysis to determine thermal stresses and deformations, since
these analyses are interdependent on each other.
The fast heating of the inner wall surface produces a temperature gradient
and therefore thermal stresses across the wall. The theory of transient heat
transfer has been treated by a number of authors, and, by means of a relaxa
tion method, a reasonable approximation of the temperature-time history at
any location may be obtained. The inner wall of the case, which is exposed to
hot gas, is usually protected by thermal insulation, as described in Section 12.6.
Therefore the heat transfer to the case is very low. In fact, for a single operation
(not two thrust periods) it is the designer's aim to keep the case temperatures
near ambient or at the most l00°C above ambient.
The case design has to provide means for attaching a nozzle (rarely more
than one nozzle), for attaching it to the vehicle, igniters, and provisions for
loading the grain. Sometimes there are also attached aerodynamic surfaces
(fins), sensing instruments, a raceway (external conduit for electrical wires),
handling hooks, and thrust vector control actuators with their power supply.
For upper stages of ballistic missiles the case can also include blow-out ports or
thrust termination devices, as described in Chapter 13. Typical methods for
attaching these items include tapered or straight multiple pins, snap rings, or
bolts. Gaskets and/or 0-ring seals prevent gas leaks.
Metal Cases
Metal cases have several advantages compared to filament-reinforced plastic
cases: they are rugged and will take considerable rough handling (required in
many tactical missile applications), are usually reasonably ductile and can yield
before failure, can be heated to a relatively high temperature (700 to l000°C or
1292 to 1832°F and higher with some special materials), and thus require less
insulation. They will not deteriorate significantly with time or weather expo
sure and are easily adapted to take concentrated loads, if made thicker at a
flange or boss. Since the metal case has much higher density and less insulation,
it occupies less volume than does a fiber-reinforced plastic case; therefore, for
the same external envelope it can contain somewhat more propellant.
Figure 14--1 shows the various sections of a typical large solid rocket case
made of welded steel. The shape of the case, particularly the length-to-diameter
ratio for cylindrical cases, influences not only the stresses to be withstood by
the case but the amount of case material required to encase a given amount of
propellant. For very large and long motors both the propellant grain and the
motor case are made in sections; the case segments are mechanically attached
and sealed to each other at the launch site. The segmented solid rocket booster
for the Space Shuttle is shown in Fig. 14--2 and discussed in Ref. 14--1. For the
critical seal between the segments a multiple-0-ring joint is often used, as
shown in Fig. 14--3 and discussed in Ref. 14--2. Segments are used when an
unsegmented motor would be too large and too heavy to be transported over
14.1. MOTOR CASE 545
Igniter
assembly
Igniter flange Girth weld (typical
pressure seal
Forward Aft
equator Longitudinal equator
weld (typical)
Aft closure
Attachment bolt
centerline
Explosive
{jcharge
!---cylindrical section---------1
~
\
[f;~
Y·ring skirt attachment
Attachment bolt
centerline
Thrust termination
port
FIGURE 14-1. Typical large solid rocket motor case made of welded alloy steel.
Total propellant weight 1, 106,280 lbf
Total RSRM weight 1 ,255,592 lbf
Maximum thrust (in vacuum) 3,060,000 lbf
Burning action time at 70°F 123.7 sec
Assembled motor length 1513 inch
Diameter of case 146 inch
Propellant mass fraction (motor) 88.2%
Temperature limits 40 to 120°F
Chamber pressure max/av. 910/662 psia
Specific impulse, altitude 268.2 sec
Propellant:
70%AP
16%AI
14% PBAN & curative
Burn rate 0.434 in./sec
FIGURE 14-2. Simplified diagram of the four segments of the Space Shuttle solid
rocket motor. Details of the thrust vector actuating mechanism or the ignition system
are not shown. (Courtesy of NASA and Thiokol Propulsion, a Division of Cordant
Technologies, Inc.)
546 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
secondary
0-ring Third 0-nng added
pnmary
0-ring
Grease---;:;:i~.IJIJt!c:Jl
bead
Shim deflection
relief flap
in
insulation
added
Longer
pins and
new retention
band added
Zinc chromate
putty
Design Redesign
FIGURE 14-3. The joints between segments of the Shuttle solid rocket booster (SRB)
were redesigned after a dramatic failure. The improvements were not only in a third 0-
ring, the mechanical joint, and its locking mechanism, but also featured a redesign of
the insulation between propellant segments. (Courtesy of NASA.)
ordinary roads (cannot make turns) or railways (will not go through some
tunnels or under some bridges) and are often too difficult to fabricate.
Small metal cases for tactical missile motors can be extruded or forged (and
subsequently machined), or made in three pieces as shown in Fig. 11-4. This
case is designed for loading a free-standing grain and the case, nozzle, and blast
tube are sealed by 0-rings (see Chapter 6 of Ref. 14--3 and Chapter 7 of Ref.
14-4). Since the mission velocities for most tactical missiles are relatively low
(100 to 1500 m/sec), their propellant mass fractions are also relatively low (0.5
to 0.8) and the percentage of inert motor mass is high. Safety factors for
tactical missile cases are often higher to allow for rough handling and cumu
lative damage. The emphasis in selecting motor cases (and other hardware
components) for tactical missiles is therefore not on highest performance (low
est inert motor mass), but on reliability, long life, low cost, ruggedness, or
survivability.
High-strength alloy steels have been the most common case metals, but
others, like aluminum, titanium, and nickel alloys, have also been used.
Table 14--2 gives a comparison of motor case material properties. Extensive
knowledge exists for designing and fabricating motor cases with low-alloy
steels with strength levels to 240,000 psi.
The maraging steels have strengths up to approximately 300,000 psi in com
bination with high fracture toughness. The term maraging is derived from the
fact that these alloys exist as relative soft low-carbon martensites in the
annealed condition and gain high strength from aging at relatively low
tern pera tures.
14.1. MOTOR CASE 547
Outer cylindrical 2-D layer
Forward skirt Inner layer is pressure vessel Aft skirt
Aft ring metal structure
Metal ring to wtlich to which nozzle is
igniter can be fastened fastened
-- ·-------·-·- ·--- ·------- -------_..~__.
Rubber seal
and connection
(2 places)
FIGURE 14-4. Simplified half-section of a typical design of a filament-wound compo
site material case. Elastomeric adhesives are shown in black. The outer layer reinforces
the cylinder portion and provides attachment skirts. The thickness of the inner case
increases at smaller diameter.
The HY steels (newer than the maraging steels) are attractive because of
their toughness and resistance to tearing, a J')roperty important to motor cases
and other pressure vessels because failures are less catastrophic. This toughness
characteristic enables a "leak: before failure" to occur, at least during hydro
static proof testing. The HY steels have strengths between 180,000 and 300,000
psi (depending on heat treatment and additives).
Stress-corrosion cracking of certain metals presents a unique problem which
can result in spontaneous failure without any visual evidence of impending
catastrophe. Emphasis given to lightweight thin metal cases aggravates stress
corrosion and crack propagation, often starting from a flaw in the metal, with
failure occurring at a stress level below the yield strength of the metal.
Wound-Filament-Reinfon:ed Plastic Cases
Filament-reinforced cases use continuous filaments of strong fibers wound in
precise patterns and bonded together with a plastic, usually an epoxy resin.
Their principal advantage is their lower weight. Most plastics soften when they
are heated above about 180°C or 355°F; they need inserts or reinforcements to
allow fastening or assembly of other components and to accept concentrated
loads. The thermal expansion of reinforced plastics is often higher than that of
metal and the thermal conductivity is much lower, causing a higher tempera-
548 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
ture gradient. References 14--3 and I~ explain the design and winding of
these composite cases, and Ref. 14--5 discusses their damage tolerance.
Typical fiber materials are, in the order of increasing strength, glass, aramids
(Kevlar), and carbon, as listed in Table 14--2. Typically, the inert mass of a case
made of carbon fiber is about 50% of a case made with glass fibers and around
67% of a case mass made with Kevlar fibers.
Individual fibers are very strong in tension (2400 to 6800 MPa or 350,000 to
1,000,000 psi). The fibers are held in place by a plastic binder of relatively low
density; it prevents fibers slipping and thus weakening in shear or bending. In a
filament-wound composite (with tension, hoop, and bending stresses) the fila
ments are not always oriented along the direction of maximum stress and the
material includes a low-strength plastic; therefore, the composite strength is
reduced by a factor of 3 to 5 compared to the strength of the filament itself. The
plastic binder is usually a thermosetting epoxy material, which limits the max
imum temperature to between 100 to 180°C or about 212 to 355°F. Although
resins with higher temperature limits are available (295°C or 563°F), their
adhesion to the fibers has not been as strong. The safety factors used (in
deterministic structural analysis) are typically for failure to occur at 1.4 to
1.6 times the maximum operating stress, and proof testing is done to 1.15 to
1.25 times the operating pressure.
A typical case design is shown schematically in Fig. I~. The forward end,
aft end, and cylindrical portion are wound on a preform or mold which already
contains the forward and aft rings. The direction in which the bands are laid
onto the mold and the tension that is applied to the bands is critical in obtain
ing a good case. The curing is done in an oven and may be done under pressure
to assure high density and minimum voids of the composite material. The
preform is then removed. One way is to use sand with a water-soluble binder
for the preform; after curing the case, the preform is washed out with water.
Since filament-wound case walls can be porous, they must be sealed. The liner
between the case and the grain can be the seal that prevents hot gases from
seeping through the case walls. Scratches, dents, and moisture absorption can
degrade the strength of the case.
In some designs the insulator is placed on the preform before winding and
the case is cured simultaneously with the insulator, as seen in Ref. 14--6. In
another design the propellant grain with its forward and aft closures is used as
the preform. A liner is applied to this grain, then an insulator, and the high
strength fibers of the case are wound in layers directly over the insulated live
propellant. Curing has to be done at a relatively low temperature so that the
propellant will not be adversely affected. This process works well with extruded
cylindrical grains. There are also cylindrical cases made of steel with an over
wrap layer of filament-wound composite material, as described in Ref. 14--7.
The allowable stresses are usually determined from tensile tests of a roving
or band and rupture tests on subscale composite cases made by an essentially
identical filament winding process. Some companies reduce the allowable
14.1. MOTOR CASE 549
strength to account for the degradation due to moisture, manufacturing imper
fections, or nonuniform density.
In a motor case the filaments must be oriented in the direction of principal
stress and must be proportioned in number to the magnitude of stress.
Compromise occurs around parts needed for nozzles, igniters, and so on,
and then orientation is kept as close to the ideal as is practicable.
Filaments are customarily clustered in yarns, rovings, or bands, as defined
in Fig. 14-5. By using two or more winding angles (i.e., helicals and circum
ferentials) and calculating the proportion of filaments in each direction, a
balanced stress structure is achieved. The ideal in balance is for each fiber
in each direction to carry an equal load (tension only). Realistically, the
filaments supported by the epoxy resin must absorb stress compression, bend
ing loads, cross-laminar shear, and interlaminar shear. Even though the latter
stresses are small compared to the tensile stress, each must be examined by
analysis since each can lead to case failure before a filament fails in tension.
In a proper design, failure occurs when the filaments reach their ultimate
tensile strength, rather than because of stresses in other directions. Figure
16~5 shows a cross section of a Kevlar filament motor case and flexible
nozzle made of ablative materials.
Band
(2 or more rovings)
FIGURE 14-5. Filament winding terminology (each sketch is drawn to a different
scale).
550 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
14.2. NOZZLES*
The supersonic nozzle provides for the expansion and acceleration of the hot
gases and has to withstand the severe environment of high heat transfer and
erosion. Advances in material technology have allowed substantial mass reduc
tions and performance improvements. Nozzles range in size from 0.05 in.
throat diameter to about 54 in., with operating durations of a fraction of a
second to several minutes (see Chapters 2 and 3 of Ref. 14-3 and Chapter 6 in
Ref. 14--4).
Classification
Nozzles for solid propellant rocket motors can be classified into five categories
as listed below and shown in Fig. 14-6.
l. Fixed Nozzle. Simple and used frequently in tactical weapon propulsion
systems for short-range air-, ground-, and sea-launched missiles, also as
strap-on propulsion for space launch vehicles such as Atlas and Delta,
and in spacecraft motors for orbital transfer. Typical throat diameters
are between 0.25 and 5 in. for tactical missile nozzles and approximately
l O in. for strap-on motors. Fixed nozzles are generally not submerged
(see below) and do not provide thrust vector control (although there are
exceptions). See Fig. 14-7.
2. Movable Nozzle. Provides thrust vector control for the flight vehicle. As
explained in Chapter 16, one movable nozzle can provide pitch and yaw
control and two are needed for roll control. Movable nozzles are typi
cally submerged and use a flexible sealed joint or bearing with two actua
tors 90 degrees apart to achieve omniaxial motion. Movable nozzles are
primarily used in long-range strategic propulsion ground- and sea
launched systems (typical throat diameters are 7 to 15 in. for the first
stage and 4 to 5 in. for the third stage) and in large space launch boosters
such as the Space Shuttle reusable solid rocket motor, Titan boost rocket
motor, and Ariane V solid rocket booster, with throat diameters in the 30
to 50 in. range.
3. Submerged Nozzles. A significant portion of the nozzle structure is sub
merged within the combustion chamber or case, as shown in Figs. 14-1 to
14-3. Submerging the nozzle reduces the overall motor length somewhat,
which in turn reduces the vehicle length and its inert mass. It is important
for length-limited applications such as silo-and submarine-launched stra
tegic missiles as well as their upper stages, and space motor propulsion
systems. Reference 14-8 describes the sloshing of trapped molten alumi
num oxide that can accumulate in the groove around a submerged noz-
*This section was revised and rewritten by Terry A. Boardman of Thiokol
Corporation, a Division of Cordant Technologies.
14.2. NOZZLES 551
Moveable nozzle with flexible joint
(allow controlled deflection of the
thrust axis and this allows
vehicle maneuvers)
Fixed nozzle (simplest)
(a) (b)
Submerged nozzle Extendable exit cone, aft sliding Extended
(shorter overall length) concept. Allows large nozzle at high position
(c) altttude, but minimizes vehicle
length and volume during ascent.
(d)
Nozzle wtth blast tube
(needed in some tactical missiles
for balancing the center of gravity)
(e)
FIGURE 14-6. Simplified diagrams of five common nozzle configurations.
zle. This accumulation is undesirable, but can be minimized by good
design.
4. Extendible Nozzle. Commonly referred to as an extendible exit cone, or
EEC, although it is not always exactly conical. It is used on strategic
missile propulsion upper-stage systems and upper stages for space launch
vehicles to maximize motor-delivered specific impulse. As shown in Fig.
11-3, it has a fixed low-area-ratio nozzle section which is enlarged to a
higher area ratio by mechanically adding a nozzle cone extension piece.
The extended nozzle improves specific impulse by doubling or tripling the
initial expansion ratio, thereby significantly increasing the nozzle thrust
coefficient. This system thus allows a very high expansion ratio nozzle to
be packaged in a relatively short length, thereby reducing vehicle inert
mass. The nozzle cone extension is in its retracted position during the
552 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
boost phase of the flight and is moved into place before the motor is
started but after separation from the lower stage. Typically, electrome
chanical or turbine-driven ball screw actuators deploy the exit cone
extension.
5. Blast-Tube-Mounted Nozzle. Used with tactical air- and ground-launched
missiles with diameter constraints to allow space for aerodynamic fin
actuation or TVC power supply systems. The blast tube also allows the
rocket motor's center of gravity (CG) to be close to or ahead of the
vehicle CG. This limits the CG travel during motor burn and makes
flight stabilization much easier.
Each motor usually has a single nozzle. A few larger motors have had four
movable nozzles, which are used for thrust vector control.
Design and Construction
Almost all solid rocket nozzles are ablatively cooled. The general construction
of a solid rocket nozzle features steel or aluminum shells (housings) that are
designed to carry structural loads (motor operating pressure and nozzle TVC
actuator load are the biggest), and composite ablative liners which are bonded
to the housings. The ablative liners are designed to insulate the steel or alumi
num housings, provide the internal aerodynamic contour necessary to effi
ciently expand combustion gases to generate thrust, and to ablate and char
in a controlled and predictable manner to prevent the buildup of heat which
could damage or substantially weaken the structural housings or the bonding
materials. Solid rocket nozzles are designed to ensure that the thickness of
ablative liners is sufficient to maintain the liner-to-housing adhesive bond
line below the temperature that would degrade the adhesive structural proper
ties during motor operation. Nozzle designs are shown in Figs. 1-5, 11-1 to
11-4, and 14-7.
The construction of nozzles ranges from simple single-piece non-movable
graphite nozzles to complex multipiece nozzles capable of moving to control
the direction of the thrust vector. The simpler, smaller nozzles are typically for
applications with low chamber pressure, short durations (perhaps less than 10
sec), low area ratios, and/or low thrust. Typical small, simple built-up nozzles
are shown in Fig. 14-7. Complex nozzles are usually necessary to meet more
difficult design requirements such as providing thrust vector controls, operat
ing at high chamber pressures (and thus at higher heat transfer rates) and/or
higher altitudes (large nozzle expansion ratios), producing very high thrust
levels, and surviving longer motor burn durations (above 30 sec).
Figures 14-8 and 14-9 illustrate the design features of the largest and one of
the most complex solid rocket nozzles currently in production. This nozzle is
used on the Reusable Solid Rocket Booster (RSRM) to provide 71.4% of the
lift-off thrust of the Space Shuttle launch vehicle shown in Figs. 1-13 and 14-2.
The nozzle is designed to provide large structural and thermal safety margins
14.2. NOZZLES 553
Liner - glass phenolic tape
Throat: pyrolytic graphite washers
Liner: carbon phenolic tape
Liner: silica phenolic tape
Throat: graphite
Solid
propellant
Partially submerged nozzle Exte rna I nozzle
FIGURE 14-7. Nozzle designs for small solid propellant motors employ ablative heat
sink wall pieces and graphite throat inserts resistant to high temperatures, erosion, and
oxidation. The pyrolytic washers or disks are so oriented that their high conductivity
direction is perpendicular to the nozzle axis.
during the shuttle booster's 123.7 sec burn time and consists of nine carbon
cloth phenolic ablative liners bonded to six steel and aluminum housings. The
housings are bolted together to form the structural foundation for the nozzle.
A flexible bearing (described further in Chapter 16), made of rubber vulcanized
to steel shims, enables the nozzle to vector omniaxially up to eight degrees from
centerline to provide thrust vector control. Since the metal housings are recov-
RSRM Nozzle Characteristics
Type Contoured or bell
Thrust vector control Flexible bearing
Expansion area ratio 7.72
Throat diameter 53.86 in.
Exit diameter 149.64 in.
Total length 178.75 in.
Nozzle weight 23, 941 !bf
Maximum pressure 1.016 psi
Maximum thrust (vac.} 3, 070, 000 lbf
Burn time 123.7 sec
Materials
Housings Steel and aluminum
Liners Carbon cloth phenolic
FIGURE 14-8. External quarter section view of nozzle configuration of the Space
Shuttle reusable solid rocket motor (RSRM). (Courtesy of Thiokol Propulsion, a
Division of Cordant Technologies.)
554 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
Snubber assembly
Forward exit cone liner
Forward exit cone housing
Nose ring
forward
Nose inlet
housing
end ring
-Cowl housing Exit cone
severance system
FIGURE 14-9. Section through movable nozzle shown in Fig. 14-8 with component
identification. (Courtesy of Thiokol Propulsion, a Division of Cordant Technologies.)
ered and reused after flight, an exit cone severance system (a circumferential
linear shaped charge) is used to cut off a major section of the aft exit cone just
below the aft exit cone aluminum housing to minimize splashdown loading on
the remaining components.
From a performance perspective, the primary nozzle design task is to
efficiently expand gas flow from the motor combustion chamber to produce
thrust. Simple nozzles with noncontoured conical exit cones can be designed
using the basic thermodynamic relationships presented in Chapter 3 to
determine throat area, nozzle half angle, and expansion ratio. A more com
plex contoured (bell-shaped) nozzle is used to reduce the divergence loss,
improve the specific impulse slightly, and reduce nozzle length and mass.
Section 3.4 gives data on designing bell-shaped nozzles with optimum wall
contour (to avoid shock waves) and minimum impact of particulates in the
exhaust gas.
Two-dimensional, two-phase, reacting gas method-of-characteristics flow
codes are used to analyze the gas-particle flow in the nozzle and determine
the optimal nozzle contour which maximizes specific imnulse while yielding
acceptable erosion characteristics. Such codes provide analytical solutions to
all identified specific impulse loss mechanisms which result in less than ideal
performance. An example is given in Table 14-3.
Figure 14-10 illustrates the amount of carbon cloth phenolic liner removed
by chemical erosion and particle impingement, the liner char depth, and gas
temperature and pressure at selected locations in the RSRM nozzle. Erosion on
the nose cap (l.73 in.) is high primarily as a result of impingement by Al 0
2 3
particles traveling down the motor bore. The impact of the particles mechani
cally removes the charred liner material. In contrast, the radial throat erosion
of 1.07 in. results primarily from the carbon liner material reacting chemically
14.2. NOZZLES 555
TABLE 14-3. Calculated Losses in the Space Shuttle Booster RSRM Nozzle
Theoretical specific impulse (vacuum conditions) 278.1 sec
Delivered specific impulse (vacuum conditions) 268.2 sec
Losses (calculated): (9.9 sec total)
Two-dimensional two-phase flow (includes divergence loss) 7.4 sec
Throat erosion (reduces nozzle area ratio) 0.9 sec
Boundary layer (wall friction) 0.7 sec
Submergence (flow turning) 0.7 sec
Finite rate chemistry (chemical equilibrium) 0.2 sec
Impingement (of Al 0 particles on nozzle wall) 0.0 sec
2 3
Shock (if turnback angle is too high or nozzle length too low) 0.0 sec
Combustion efficiency (incomplete burning) 0.0 sec
with oxidizing species in the combustion gas flow at the region of greatest heat
transfer. At the throat location, impingement erosion is essentially zero
because Al 0 particles are traveling parallel to the nozzle surface.
2 3
The acronym ITE is often used; it means integral throat/entrance and refers
to a single-piece nozzle throat insert that also includes a part of the converging
entry section. ITE nozzle inserts can be seen in Figs. 1-5, 11-1, 11-3, and 11-4.
Nozzle throat erosion causes the throat diameter to enlarge during operation,
and is one of the problems encountered in nozzle design. Usually, a throat area
increase larger than 5% is considered unacceptable for most solid rocket appli-
1.07
1.15 0.42
0.44 5,504
0.87
5,934 465 0.30
0.43
774 0.57
6,028 \ I 4, 720
870\ 116
I
1.73/
0.57
6,047 0.53
926 0.40
0.14 ·
6,047
930 062 ~
6,047~
930 ~~ Erosion (1n.)
Char depth (in.) } At end of 120 second burn
Temperature (0R)
Pressure (psi) } One second after motor 1grnt1on
FIGURE 14-10. Erosion measurements and char depth data of the carbon fiber phe
nolic material of the nozzle of the Space Shuttle reusable solid rocket motor. (Courtesy
of Thiokol Propulsion, a Division of Cordant Technologies.)
556 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
cations, since it causes a reduction in thrust and chamber pressure. Erosion
occurs not only at the throat region (typically, at 0.01 to 0.25 mm/sec or 0.004
to 0.010 in./sec), but also at the sections immediately upstream and down
stream of the throat region, as shown in Fig. 14-10. Nozzle assemblies typically
lose 3 to 12% of their initial inert mass. Erosion is caused by the complex
interaction between the high-temperature, high-velocity gas flow, the chemi
cally aggressive species in the gas, and the mechanical abrasion by particles.
The carbon in the nozzle material reacts with species like 0 2, 0, OH, or H 20
and is oxidized; the cumulative concentration of these species is an indication
of the likely erosion. Tables 5-6 and 5-7 give chemical concentrations for the
exhaust species from aluminized propellant. Fuel-rich propellants (which con
tain little free 0 or 0) and propellants where some of the gaseous oxygen is
2
removed by aluminum oxidation show less tendency to cause erosion. Uneven
erosion of a nozzle causes thrust misalignment.
Finding the optimum nozzle wall contour requires an analysis (computer
codes for bell-shaped nozzles using the method of characteristics are mentioned
in Section 3.4) to determine the wall contour which most rapidly turns the gas
to near axial flow without introducing shock waves or impinging excessive
aluminum oxide (Al 20 3) particles on the nozzle wall. Figure 3-14 illustrates
the key parameters which govern design of the nozzle contour; the initial angle
8; (angle through which supersonic flow is turned immediately downstream of
the nozzle throat), the throat to exit plane length L, the exit plane exit angle e"'
ee.
and the turn back angle 8; - With solid or liquid particles in the exhaust the
impingement can be minimized with an initial angle typically between 20 and
26° and a turn back angle of typically IO to 15°. The length reduction of a bell
shaped nozzle (with solid particles in the gas) is typically 80 to 90% of the
length of an equivalent conical nozzle with 15° half angle. The nozzle throat
inlet contour is generally based on a hyperbolic spiral that uniformly acceler
ates the combustion gas flow to supersonic velocity at the throat plane.
Heat Absorption and Nozzle Materials
Rocket motors never reach thermal equilibrium during their firing. The tem
peratures of all components exposed to the heat flow increase continuously
during operation. In a good thermal design the critical locations reach a max
imum allowable temperature a short time after the motor stops running. The
nozzle components rely on their heat-absorbing capacity (high specific heat and
high energy demand for material decomposition) and slow heat transfer (good
insulation with low thermal conductivity) to withstand the stresses and strains
imposed by the thermal gradients and loads. The maximum allowable tem
perature for any of the motor materials is just below the temperature at which
excessive degradation occurs (the material loses strength, melts, becomes too
soft, cracks, pyrolyses, unglues, oxidizes too rapidly). The operating duration is
limited by the design and amount of heat-absorbing and insulating material
pieces. Stated in a different way, the objective is to design a nozzle with just
14.2. NOZZLES 557
sufficient heat-absorbing material mass and insulation mass at the various
locations within the nozzle, so that its structures and joints will do the job
for the duration of the application under all likely operating conditions.
The selection and application of the proper material is the key to the suc
cessful design of a solid rocket nozzle. Table 14-4 groups various typical nozzle
materials according to their usage. The high-temperature exhaust of solid rock
ets presents an unusually severe environment for the nozzle materials, espe
cially when metalized propellants are employed.
About 60 years ago nozzles were made out of a single piece of molded
polycrystalline graphite and some were supported by metal housing structures.
They eroded easily, but were low in cost. We still use them today for short
duration, low chamber pressure, low altitude flight applications of low thrust,
such as in certain tactical missiles. For more severe conditions a throat insert or
ITE was placed into the graphite piece; this insert was a denser, better grade of
graphite; later pyrolytic graphite washers and fiber-reinforced carbon materials
came into use. For a period of time tungsten inserts were used; they had very
good erosion resistance, but were heavy and often cracked. Pyrolytic graphite
was introduced and is still being used as washers for the throat insert of small
nozzles, as shown in Fig. 14-7. The high-strength carbon fiber and the carbon
matrix were major advances in high-temperature materials. For small and
medium-sized nozzles, ITE pieces were then made of carbon-carbon, which is
an abbreviation for carbon fibers in a carbon matrix (see Ref. 14-9). The
orientation of the fibers can be two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional
(3D), as described below. Some properties of all these materials are listed in
Tables 14-4 and 14-5. For large nozzles the then existing technology did not
allow the fabrication of large 3D carbon-carbon ITE pieces, so layups of
carbon fiber (or silicon fiber) cloth in a phenolic matrix were used.
The regions immediately upstream and downstream of the throat have less
heat transfer, less erosion, and lower temperatures than the throat region, and
less expensive materials are usually satisfactory. This includes various grades of
graphite, or ablative materials, strong high-temperature fibers (carbon or silica)
in a matrix of phenolic or epoxy resins, which are described later in this section.
Figure 16-6 shows a movable nozzle with multilayer insulators behind the
graphite nozzle pieces directly exposed to heat. These insulators (between the
very hot throat piece and housing) limit the heat transfer and prevent excessive
housing temperatures.
In the diverging exit section the heat transfer and temperatures are even
lower and similar, but less capable and less expensive materials can be used
here. This exit segment can be built integral with the nozzle throat segment (as
it is in most small nozzles), or it can be a separate one- or two-piece subas
sembly which is then fastened to the smaller diameter throat segment. Ablative
materials without oriented fibers as in cloth or ribbons, but with short fibers or
insulating ceramic particles, can be used here. For large area ratios (upper
stages and space transfer), the nozzle will often protrude beyond the vehicle's
boat tail surface. This allows radiation cooling, since the exposed exit cone can
558 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
TABLE 14-4. Typical Motor Nozzle Materials and Their Functions
Function Material Remarks
Structure and Aluminum Limited to 515°C (959°F)
pressure Low carbon steel, high Good between 625 and l 200°C
container strength steels, and special (1100 and 2200°F), depending on
(housing) alloys material; rigid and strong
Heat sink and Molded graphite For low chamber temperatures
heat-resistant and low pressures only; low cost
material at inlet Pyrolitic graphite Has anisotropic conductivity
and throat Tungsten, molybdenum, Heavy, expensive, subject to
section; severe or other heavy metal cracking; resists erosion
thermal Carbon or Kevlar fiber Sensitive to fiber orientation.
environment and cloth with phenolic or Ablative materials
high-velocity gas, plastic resins Used with large throats
with erosion Carbon-carbon Three- or four dimensional
interwoven filaments, strong,
expensive, limited to 3300°C
(6000°F)
Insulator (behind Ablative plastics, with fillers Want low conductivity, good
heat sink or of silica or Kevlar, phenolic adhesion, ruggedness, erosion
flame barrier); resins resistance; can be filament wound
not exposed to or impregnated cloth layup with
flowing gas subsequent machining
Flame barrier Ablative plastics (same as Lower cost than carbon-carbon;
(e xposed to hot insulators but with less better erosion resistance than
low-velocity gas) filler and tough rubber many insulators
matrix)
Carbon, Kevlar or silica Cloth or ribbon layups; woven
fibers with phenolic or and compressed, glued to housng
epoxy resin
Carbon-carbon Higher temperature than others,
three-dimensional weave or layup
Nozzle exit cone Ablative plastic with metal Heavy, limited duration; cloth or
housing structure woven ribbon lay-ups, glued to
housing
Refractory metal (tantalum, Radiation cooled, strong, needs
molybdenum) coating for oxidation resistance;
can be thin, limited to 1650°C
(3000°F), unlimited duration
Carbon-carbon, may need Radiation cooled, higher allowable
gas seal temperature than metals; two- or
three-dimensional weave, strong,
often porous
TABLE 14-5. Comparison of Properties of Molded and Pyrolytic Graphite, Carbon-Carbon, Carbon Cloth, and Silica Cloth Phenolic
Three-Dimensional
ATJ Carbon Fibers in a Carbon Cloth Silica Cloth
Modern Graphite Pyrolytic Graphite Carbon Matrix Phenolic Phenolic
Density (lbm/in.3 ) 0.0556 0.079 0.062 to 0.072 0.053 0.062
Thermal expansion 0.005 to 0.007 0.00144 (warp) I - 9 X 10-6 8.02x 10-6 7.6 X 10-6
(in./in./°F) 0.0432 (fill)
Thermal conductivity J.2 X 10-3 4.9 x 10-5 (warpt 2 to 2lxl0-5 (warpt 2.2 x 10-3 (warpt I.I I x 10-3 (warpt
(Btu/in.-sec/°F) at
room temperature J.5 X 10-3 4.2 x 10-5 (fillt 8 to 50 X 10-5 (fill)"
6 6 6 6 6
Modulus of elasticity 1.5 x 10 (warpt 4.5 x 10 (warpt 35 to 80 X 10 2.86 x 10- (warpt 3.17 x 10- (warpt
6 6 6 6
(psi) at room 1.2 x I 0 (fillt J.5 X 10 (fillt 2.9 J X 10- (fillt 2.86 X 10- (fillt
temperature
6 6 6
Shear modulus (psi) 0.2 x 10 (warpt 0.8J X 10 0.80 X 10
6
2. 7 X 10 (fillt
Erosion rate (typical) 0.004 to 0.006 0.00 I to 0.002 0.0005 to 0.00 I 0.005 to 0.010 0.010 to 0.020
(in./sec)
a Warp is in direction of principal fibers. Fill is at right angles to warp.
c.n
c.n
<D
560 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
reject heat by radiation to space. Lightweight thin high temperature metals
(niobium, titanium, stainless steel, or a thin carbon-carbon shell) with radia
tion cooling have been used in a few upper-stage or spacecraft exit cone appli
cations. Since radiation-cooled nozzle exit sections reach thermal equilibrium,
their duration is unlimited.
The housing or structural support of the nozzle uses the same material as the
metal case, such as steel or aluminum. The housings are never allowed to
become very hot. Some of the simpler, smaller nozzles (with one, two, or
three pieces, mostly graphite) do not have a separate housing structure, but
use the ITE (integral throat/entry) for the structure.
Estimates of nozzle internal temperatures and temperature distributions
with time can be made using two-dimensional finite element difference methods
for transient heat transfer analyses. These are similar in principle to the tran
sient heat transfer method described in Section 8.3 and shown in Fig. 8-21.
After firing, the nozzle temperatures reach an equilibrium value by conducting
heat from the hotter inner parts, which were exposed to the hot gas, to the
cooler outer pieces. Sometimes the outer pieces will exceed their limit tempera
tures and suffer damage after firing. The structural analysis (stresses and
strains) of the key nozzle components is dependent on the heat transfer ana
lysis, which determines the component temperatures. This allows use of the
proper material physical properties, which are temperature dependent. The
design must also allow for the thermal growth and the differential expansion
of adjacent parts.
Typical materials used for the ITE (integral throat and entrance) or nozzle
throat insert are listed in Table 14-5. They are exposed to the most severe
conditions of heat transfer, thermal stresses, and high temperatures. Their
physical properties are often anisotropic; that is, their properties vary with
the orientation or direction of the crystal structure or the direction of reinfor
cing fibers. Polycrystalline graphites are extruded or molded. Different grades
with different densities and capabilities are available. As already mentioned,
they are used extensively for simple nozzles and for ITE parts. Pyrolytic gra
phite is strongly anisotropic and has excellent conductivity in a preferred direc
tion. A nozzle using it is shown in Fig. 14-7. It is fabricated by depositing
graphite crystals on a substratum in a furnace containing methane gas. Its use
is declining, but it is still installed in current rocket motors of older design.
The carbon-carbon material is made from carefully oriented sets of carbon
fibers (woven, knitted, threaded, or laid up in patterns) in a carbon matrix.
Two-dimensional (2D) material has fibers in two directions, 3D has fibers
oriented in three directions (at right angle to each other), and 4D has an
extra set of fibers at about a 45° angle to the other three directions. An organic
liquid resin is injected into the spaces between the fibers. The assembly is
pressurized, the filler is transformed into a carbon char by heating and is
compacted by further injection and densification processes. The graphitization
is then performed at temperatures higher than 2000°C. This material is expen
sive but suited to nozzle applications. Highly densified material is superior in
14.2. NOZZLES 561
high heat transfer regions, such as the throat. The multidirectional fiber rein
forcements allow them to better withstand the high thermal stresses introduced
by the steep temperature gradients within the component.
Ablative Materials. These are not only commonly used in the nozzles of
rocket motors, but also in some insulation materials. They are usually a
composite material of high-temperature organic or inorganic high strength
fibers, namely high silica glass, aramids (Kevlar), or carbon fibers,
impregnated with organic plastic materials such as phenolic or epoxy resin.
The fibers may be individual strands or bands (applied in a geometric
pattern on a winding machine), or come as a woven cloth or ribbon, all
impregnated with resin.
The ablation process is a combination of surface melting, sublimation, char
ring, evaporation, decomposition in depth, and film cooling. As shown in Fig.
14-11, progressive layers of the ablative material undergo an endothermic
degradation, that is, physical and chemical changes that absorb heat. While
some of the ablative material evaporates (and some types also have a viscous
liquid phase), enough charred and porous solid material remains on the surface
to preserve the basic geometry and surface integrity. Upon rocket start the
ablative material acts like any thermal heat sink, but the poor conductivity
causes the surface temperature to rise rapidly. At 650 to 800 K some of the
resins start to decompose endothermically into a porous carbonaceous char
and pyrolysis gases. As the char depth increases, these gases undergo an
endothermic cracking process as they percolate through the char in a counter
flow direction to the heat flux. These gases then form an artificial fuel-rich,
protective, relatively cool, but flimsy boundary layer over the char.
Since char is almost all carbon and can withstand 3500 K or 6000 R, the
porous char layer allows the original surface to be maintained (but with a
rough surface texture) and provides geometric integrity. Char is a weak mate
rial and can be damaged or abraded by direct impingement of solid particles in
the gas. Ablative material construction is used for part or all of the chambers
Before
operation
Virgin
•
ablative
material
Metal wall
FIGURE 14-11. Zones in an ablative material during rocket operation with fibers at
45° to the flow.
562 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
and/or nozzles shown in Figs. 1-5, 6-10, 11-1 to 11--4, and 14--10.
Ablative parts are formed either by high-pressure molding ( ~ 55 to 69 MPa
or 8000 to 10,000 psi at 149°C or 300°F) or by tapewrapping on a shaped
mandrel followed by an autoclave curing process at 1000 to 2000 psi pressure
and 300°F temperature. Tapewrapping is a common method of forming very
large nozzles. The wrapping procedure normally includes heating the shaped
mandrel(~ 54°C or 130°F), heating the tape and resin (66 to 121°C or 150 to
250°F), pressure rolling the tape of fiber material and the injected resin in place
while rolling ( ~ 35, 000 N/m or 200 !bf/in. width), and maintaining the proper
rolling speed, tape tension, wrap orientation, and resin flow rate. Experience
has proven that as-wrapped density is an important indicator of procedural
acceptability, with the desired criterion being near 90% of the autoclaved
density. Resin content usually ranges between 25 and 35%, depending on
the fabric-reinforcing material and the particular resin and its filler material.
Normally, the mechanical properties of the cured ablative material, and also
the durability of the material during rocket operation, correlate closely with the
cured material density. Within an optimal density range, low density usually
means poor bonding of the reinforcing layers, high porosity, low strength, and
high erosion rate.
In liquid propellant rockets, ablatives have been effective in very small
thrust chambers (where there is insufficient regenerative cooling capacity), in
pulsing, restartable spacecraft control rocket engines, and in variable-thrust
(throttled) rocket engines. Figure 6-10 shows an ablative nozzle extension for a
large liquid propellant rocket engine.
The heat transfer properties of the many available ablative and other fiber
based materials will depend on their design, composition, and construction.
Figure 14--12 shows several common fiber orientation and approaches. The
orientation of fibrous reinforcements, whether in the form of tape, cloth, fila
ments, or random short fibers, has a marked impact on the erosion resistance
of composite nozzles (for erosion data see Figure 14--10). When perpendicular
to the gas flow, the heat transfer to the wall interior is high because of the short
conducting path. Good results have been obtained when the fibers are at 40 to
60° relative to the gas flow over the surface. Nozzle fabrication variables pre
sent wide variations in nozzle life for a given design; the variables include the
- -
Hot gas-
Parallel fibers End grain fibers Shingle fibers
FIGURE 14-12. Simplified sketches of three different types of fiber-reinforced ablative
materials.
14.3. IGNITER HARDWARE 563
method of wrapping, molding, and curing, resin batch processes, and resin
sources.
14.3. IGNITER HARDWARE
In Section 13.2 the process of ignition was described, and in Section 12.5 some
of the propellants used in igniters were mentioned briefly. In this section we
discuss specific igniter types, locations, and their hardware (see Ref. 14-10).
Since the igniter propellant mass is small (often less than 1 % of the motor
propellant) and burns mostly at low chamber pressure (low / it contributes
5),
very little to the motor overall total impulse. It is the designer's aim to reduce
the igniter propellant mass and the igniter inert hardware mass to a minimum,
just big enough to assure ignition under all operating conditions.
Figure 14-13 shows several alternative locations for igniter installations.
When mounted on the forward end, the gas flow over the propellant surface
helps to achieve ignition. With aft mounting there is little gas motion, parti
cularly near the forward end; here ignition must rely on the temperature,
pressure, and heat transfer from the igniter gas. If mounted on the nozzle,
the igniter hardware and its support is discarded shortly after the igniter has
used all its propellants and there is no inert mass penalty for the igniter case.
There are two basic types: pyrotechnic igniters and pyrogen igniters; both are
discussed below.
Pyrotechnic lgniters
In industrial practice, pyrotechnic igniters are defined as igniters ( other than
pyrogen-type igniters as defined further on) using solid explosives or energetic
propellant-like chemical formulations (usually small pellets of propellant which
Aft, internal Aft, external
1-·-·-$
Forward, internal Forward, external
(supported by nozzle exit cone)
FIGURE 14-13. Simple diagrams of mounting options for igniters. Grain configura
tions are not shown.
564 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
give a large burning surface and a short burning time) as the heat-producing
material. This definition fits a wide variety of designs, known as bag and
carbon igniters, powder can, plastic case, pellet basket, perforated tube, com
bustible case, jellyroll, string, or sheet igniters. The common pellet-basket
design in Fig. 14-14 is typical of the pyrotechnic igniters. Ignition of the
main charge, in this case pellets consisting of 24 % boron-71 % potassium
perchlorate-5% binder, is accomplished by stages; first, on receipt of an elec
trical signal the initiator releases the energy of a small amount of sensitive
powdered pyrotechnic housed within the initiator, commonly called the
squib or the primer charge; next, the booster charge is ignited by heat released
from the squib; and finally, the main ignition charge propellants are ignited.
A special form of pyrotechnic igniter is the surface-bonded or grain-mounted
igniter. Such an igniter has its initiator included within a sandwich of flat
sheets; the layer touching the grain is the main charge of pyrotechnic. This
form of igniter is used with multipulse motors with two or more end-burning
grains. The ignition of the second and successive pulses of these motors pre
sents unusual requirements for available space, compatibility with the grain
materials, life, and the pressure and temperature resulting from the booster
grain operation. Advantages of the sheet igniter include light weight, low
volume, and high heat flux at the grain surface. Any inert material employed
(such as wires and electric ceramic insulators) is usually blown out of the motor
nozzle during ignition and their impacts have caused damage to the nozzle or
plugged it, particularly if they are not intentionally broken up into small pieces.
Vent-plate
Electrical
connector
Initiator wire
and propellant
FIGURE 14-14. Typical pyrotechnic igniter with three different propellant charges that
ignite in sequence.
14.3. IGNITER HARDWARE 565
Pyrogen lgniters
A pyrogen igniter is basically a small rocket motor that is used to ignite a larger
rocket motor. The pyrogen is not designed to produce thrust. All use one or
more nozzle orifices, both sonic and supersonic types, and most use conven
tional rocket motor grain formulations and design technology. Heat transfer
from the pyrogen to the motor grain is largely convective, with the hot gases
contacting the grain surface as contrasted to a highly radiative energy emitted
by pyrotechnic igniters. Figures 11-1, 11-2, and 11-20 illustrate rocket motors
with a typical pyrogen igniter. The igniter in Fig. 16-5 has three nozzles and a
cylindrical grain with high-burn-rate propellant. For pyrogen igniters the
initiator and the booster charge are very similar to the designs used in pyro
technic igniters. Reaction products from the main charge impinge on the sur
face of the rocket motor grain, producing motor ignition. Common practice on
the very large motors is to mount externally, with the pyrogen igniter pointing
its jet up through the large motor nozzle. In this case, the igniter becomes a
piece of ground-support equipment.
Two approaches are commonly used to safeguard against motor misfires, or
inadvertent motor ignition; one is the use of the classical safe and arm device
and the second is the design of safeguards into the initiator. Energy for unin
tentional ignition-usually a disaster when it happens-----can be (1) static elec
tricity, (2) induced current from electromagnetic radiation, such as radar, (3)
induced electrical currents from ground test equipment, communication appa
ratus, or nearby electrical circuits in the flight vehicle, and (4) heat, vibration,
or shock from handling and operations. Functionally, the safe and arm device
serves as an electrical switch to keep the igniter circuit grounded when not
operating; in some designs it also mechanically misaligns or blocks the ignition
train of events so that unwanted ignition is precluded even though the initiator
fires. When transposed into the arm position, the ignition flame can be reliably
propagated to the igniter's booster and main charges.
Electric initiators in motor igniters are also called squibs, glow plugs, pri
mers, and sometimes headers; they always constitute the initial element in the
ignition train and, if properly designed, can be a safeguard against unintended
ignition of the motor. Three typical designs of initiators are shown in Fig. 14-
15. Both (a) and (b) structurally form a part of the rocket motor case and
generically are headers. In the integral diaphragm type (a) the initial ignition
energy is passed in the form of a shock wave through the diaphragm activating
the acceptor charge, with the diaphragm remaining integral. This same princi
ple is also used to transmit a shock wave through a metal case wall or a metal
insert in a filament-wound case; the case would not need to be penetrated and
sealed. The header type (b) resembles a simple glow plug with two high-resis
tance bridgewires buried in the initiator charge. The exploding bridgewire
design (c) employs a small bridgewire (0.02 to 0.10 mm) of low-resistance
material, usually platinum or gold, that is exploded by application of a high
voltage discharge.
566 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
Detonator charge
Electrical conductors
Initiator charge
(a)
Single electrode
(pop-out)
Wires
(b)
Bridgewire
(c)
FIGURE 14---15. Typical electric initiators; (a) integral diaphragm type; (b) header type
with double bridgewire; (c) exploding bridgewire type.
The safeguard aspect of the initiator appears as a basic design feature in the
form of (I) minimum threshold electrical energy required for activation, (2)
voltage blockage provisions (usually, air gaps or semiconductors in the elec
trical circuit), or (3) responsiveness only to a specific energy pulse or frequency
band. Invariably, such safeguards compromise to some degree the safety pro
vided by the classical safe and arm device.
A new method of initiating the action of an igniter is to use laser energy to
start the combustion of an initiator charge. Here there are no problems with
induced currents and other inadvertent electrical initiation. The energy from a
small neodymium/YA G laser, external to the motor, travels in fiber-optical
glass cables to the pyrotechnic initiator charge (Ref. 14-11). Sometimes an
optical window in the case or closure wall allows the initiator charge to be
inside the case.
14.3. IGNITER HARDWARE 567
Igniter Analysis and Design
The basic theories of initiating ignition, heat transfer, propellant decomposi
tion, deflagration, flame spreading, and chamber filling are common to the
design and application of pyrotechnic and pyrogen igniters. In general, the
mathematical models of the physical and chemical processes that must be
considered in the design of igniters are far from complete and accurate. See
Chapter 5 by Hermance and Chapter 6 by Kumar and Kuo in Ref. 13~1, and
Ref. 14--10.
Analysis and design of igniters, regardless of the type, depend heavily on
experimental results, including past successes and failures with full-scale
motors. The effect of some of the important parameters has become quite
predictable, using data from developed motors. For example, Fig. 14--16 is
of benefit in estimating the mass of igniter main charge for motors of various
sizes (motor free volume). From these data,
(14--4)
E
~
Ol)
:ii
"'
E
~
11 103
<.)
·eC;:
E
102
80
60
40
20
107 106 105 104 103 102
Motor free volume, in.3
FIGURE 14-16. Igniter charge mass versus motor free volume, based on experience
with various-sized rocket motors using AP/Al composite propellant. (Data with permis
sion from Ref. 14-12.)
568 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
where mis the igniter charge in grams and VF is the motor free volume in cubic
inches or the void in the case not occupied by propellant. A larger igniter mass
flow means a shorter ignition delay. The ignition time events were shown in
Fig. 13-3.
14.4. ROCKET MOTOR DESIGN APPROACH
Although there are some common elements in the design of all solid propellant
rocket motors, there is no single, well-defined procedure or design method.
Each class of application has some different requirements. Individual designers
and their organizations have different approaches, background experiences,
sequences of steps, or emphasis. The approach also varies with the amount
of available data on design issues, propellants, grains, hardware, or materials,
with the degree of novelty (many "new" motors are actually modifications of
proven existing motors), or the available proven computer programs for
analysis.
Usually the following items are part of the preliminary design process. We
start with the requirements for the flight vehicle and the motor, such as those
listed in Table 14-6. If the motor to be designed has some similarities to proven
existing motors, their parameters and flight experience will be helpful in redu
cing the design effort and enhancing the confidence in the design. The selection
of the propellant and the grain configuration are usually made early in the
preliminary design; propellant selection was discussed in Chapter 12 and grains
in Chapter 11. It is not always easy for the propellant to satisfy its three key
requirements, namely the performance U,), burning rate to suit the thrust-time
curve, and strength (maximum stress and strain). A well-characterized propel
lant, a proven grain configuration, or a well-tested piece of hardware will
usually be preferred and is often modified somewhat to fit the new application.
Compared to a new development, the use of proven propellant, grain design, or
hardware components avoids many analyses and tests.
An analysis of the structural integrity should be undertaken, at least in a few
of the likely places, where stresses or strains might exceed those that can be
tolerated by the grain or the other key components at the limits of loading or
environmental conditions. An analysis of the nozzle should be done, particu
larly if the nozzle is complex or includes thrust vector control. Such a nozzle
analysis was described briefly in an earlier section of this chapter. If gas flow
analysis shows that erosive burning is likely to happen during a portion of the
burning duration, it must be decided whether it can be tolerated, or whether it
is excessive and a modification of the propellant, the nozzle material, or the
grain geometry needs to be made. Usually a preliminary evaluation is also done
of the resonances of the grain cavity with the aim of identifying possible
combustion instability modes (see Chapter 13). Motor performance analysis,
heat transfer, and stress analyses in critical locations will usually be done.
14.4. ROCKET MOTOR DESIGN APPROACH 569
TABLE 14-6. Typical Requirements and Constraints for Solid Rocket Motors
Requirement Category Examples
Application Definition of mission, vehicle and propulsion
requirements, flight paths, maneuvers, environment
Functional Total impulse, thrust~time curve, ignition delay, initial
motor mass, specific impulse, TVC angles and
accelerations, propellant fraction, class I. I to 1.3, burn
time, and tolerances on all of these parameters
Interfaces Attachments to vehicle, fins, TVC system, power supply,
instruments, lifting and transport features, grain
inspection, control signals, shipping container
Operation Storage, launch, flight environment, temperature limits,
transport loads or vibrations, plume characteristics
(smoke, toxic gas, radiation), life, reliability, safe and
arm device functions, field inspections
Structure Loads and accelerations imposed by vehicle (flight
maneuvers), stiffness to resist vehicle oscillations,
safety factors
Insensitive munitions Response to slow and fast cook-off, bullet impact,
(military application) sympathetic detonation, shock tests
Cost and schedule Stay within the allocated time and money
Deactivation Method of removing/recycling of propellants, safe
disposal of over-age motors
Constraints Limits on volume, length, or diameter; minimum
acceptable performance, maximum cost
There is considerable interdependence and feedback between the propellant
formulation, grain geometry /design, stress analysis, thermal analysis, major
hardware component designs, and their manufacturing processes. It is difficult
to finalize one of these without considering all tl'.e others, and there may be
several iterations of each. Data from tests of laboratory samples, subscale
motors, and full-scale motors have a strong influence on these steps.
Preliminary layout drawings or CAD ( compute1-aided design) images of the
motor with its key components will be made in sufficient detail to provide sizes
and reasonably accurate dimensions. For example, a preliminary design of the
thermal insulation (often with a heat transfer analysis) will provide preliminary
dimensions for that insulator. The layout is used to estimate volumes, inert
masses, or propellant masses, and thus the propellant mass fraction.
If any of these analyses or layouts show a potential problem or a possible
failure to meet the initial requirements or constraints, then usually a modifica
tion of the design, possibly of the propellant, or of the grain configuration may
need to be made. The design process needs to be repeated with the changed
motor design. If the proposed changes are too complex or not effective, then a
570 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
change in the motor requirements may be the cure to a particular problem of
noncompliance with the requirements. It is common to have several iterations
in the preliminary design and the final design. Any major new feature can result
in additional development and testing to prove its performance, reliability,
operation, or cost; this means a longer program and extra resources.
A simplified diagram of one particular approach to motor preliminary
design and development activities for a rocket motor is shown in Fig. 14--17.
Not shown in this diagram are many other steps, such as igniter design and
tests, liner/insulating selection, thrust vector control design and test, reliability
analysis, evaluation of alternative designs, material specifications, inspection/
quality control steps, safety provision, special test equipment, special test
instrumentation, and so on.
If the performance requirements are narrow and ambitious, it will be neces
sary to study the cumulative tolerances of the performance or of various other
parameters. For example, practical tolerances may be assigned to the propel
lant density, nozzle throat diameter (erosion), burn rate scale factor, initial
burning surface area, propellant mass, or pressure exponent. These, in turn,
reflect themselves into tolerances in process specifications, specific inspections,
dimensional tolerances, or accuracy of propellant ingredient weighing. Cost is
always a major factor and a portion of the design effort will be spent looking
for lower-cost materials, simpler manufacturing processes, fewer assembly
steps, or lower-cost component designs. For example, tooling for casting,
mandrels for case winding, and tooling for insulator molding can be expensive.
The time needed for completing a design can be shortened when there is good
communication and a cooperative spirit between designers, propellant specia
lists, analysts, customer representatives, manufacturing people, test personnel,
or vendors concerned with this effort. Reference 14--13 deals with some of the
uncertainties of a particular booster motor design, and Ref. 14-14 discusses
design optimization.
A preliminary project plan is usually formulated simultaneously with the
preliminary design work. A decade or more ago the project plan was made
after the preliminary design was completed. With today's strong emphasis on
low cost, the people working on the preliminary designs have also to work on
reducing costs on all components and processes. The project plan reflects
decisions and defines the number of motors and key components to be
built, the availability and lead time of critical materials or components, the
type and number of tests (including aging or qualification tests); it identifies
the manufacturing, inspection, and test facilities to be used, the number and
kind of personnel (and when they will be needed), or any special tooling or
fixtures. These decisions and data are needed to make a realistic estimate of
cost and a preliminary schedule. If these exceed the allowable cost or the
desired delivery schedule, then some changes have to be made. For example,
this may include changes in the number of units to be built, the number and
types of tests, or a redesign for easier, less costly assembly. However, such
changes must not compromise reliability or performance. It is difficult to
14.4. ROCKET MOTOR DESIGN APPROACH 571
Company experience/capability---~
~---Vehicle mission, requirements
Available technologies
and constraints
Rocket motor
requirements 1-------,~ Selection
Studies and analyses criteria
and constraints
Performance estimates
Ballistic analysis Experimental support
Grain geometry
Build and test new or
(F and Ab versus t)
modified propellant,
Structure analysis
___ __..._-t components and
Thermal analysis Conceptual materials samples
V coe mhi pc ale t ibin ilt ie tyr face ,I .. . --- designs Lab. and subscale
1 motor tests
Pre!. acoustic study I
I
Design optimization I
I
(p 1, A 2/A 1, r) II
Hazards evaluation I Decisions/selections
I ___ _
Insulation estimates I.. . (to be iterated)
Preliminary
Erosion estimate
design layouts Propellant
Failure analysis
and project plans Chamber pressure
Weight and balance 1----~ ,...,___~___, Grain configuration
Alternate grains, Nozzle configuration
cases, nozzles, igniters Thrust-time profile
Igniter type and
location
Cost and schedule Case type/material
Thrust vector
Pre!. test plan
control method
Pre!. manufacturing
Number to be
concept/plan
built and tested
Pre!. estimates of cost
and time
Design reviews and
customer approval
Selected motor prelim.
design (baseline)
Preliminary specifications
Pre!. project plan
Approval to proceed with
final design
FIGURE 14-17 Simplified diagram of one approach to the preliminary design activity
sequences and interrelations. Dashed lines indicate some of the feedback pathes. Some
of the specific items listed here apply only to certain types of rocket motors.
make a good plan, and good cost or time estimates, when the rocket motor
has not been well defined or designed in sufficient detail. These plans and
estimates are therefore largely based on experience with prior successful simi
lar rocket motors.
572 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
The final result of a preliminary design will be layout drawings or CAD
images of the selected configuration, a prediction of performance, an estimate
of motor mass (and, if needed, also the travel of the center of gravity), an
identification of the propellant, grain, geometry, insulation, and several of
the key materials of the hardware components. An estimate of predicted relia
bility and motor life would be accompanied by supporting data. All this infor
mation would be presented for review of the selected preliminary design. The
review would be undertaken by a diverse group of motor experts, the vehicle
designer, safety engineers, specialists in manufacturing, assembly, or inspec
tion, customer representatives, analysts, and others. Here the preliminary
design team explains why they selected their particular design and how it
meets the requirements. With competent reviewers there usually will be sugges
tions for changes or further improvements. The project plan, preliminary cost
estimates, and preliminary schedule are sometimes included with the design
review, but more often these are presented to a different group of experts, or
just to the customer's experts.
After the design review and the approval of the selected preliminary design,
the detail or final design of all parts and components and the writing of certain
specifications can begin. During manufacture and development testing some
design changes may become necessary to improve the manufacture, reduce
cost, or remedy a technical problem that became evident. In many organiza
tions the final, detailed design is again submitted to a design review before
manufacturing can begin. The new motor will then start its development test
ing. In some larger, expensive motors, that have a lot of heritage from prior
proven motors, the development may consist of a single motor firing. For
motors which are built in large quantities and for motors with major new
features, the development and qualification may involve the testing of 10 to
30 motors. The final design ends when all detail drawings or CAD images and a
final parts list are completed, and specifications for motor testing, certain
manufacturing operations, or materials/component acceptance have been pre
pared. The detail design is considered to be completed when the motor success
fully passes its development and qualification tests and begins production for
deliveries.
Example 14-1. This example shows one method for making a preliminary determina
tion of the design parameters of a solid rocket using a composite propellant. The rocket
is launched at altitude and flies at constant altitude. The following data are given:
Specific impulse (actual) I, = 240 sec at altitude and 1000 psia
Burning rate r = 0.8 in.,/sec at 1000 psia and 60°F
Propellant density Ph = 0.066 lbm/in. 3 at sea level
Specific heat ratio k = 1.25
Chamber pressure, nominal p = 1000 psi
1
Desired average thrust F = 20, 000 !bf
Maximum vehicle diameter D = 16 in.
Desired duration th = 5.0 sec
14.4. ROCKET MOTOR DESIGN APPROACH 573
Ambient pressure 3.0 psi (at altitude)
Vehicle payload 50 IO lbm (includes structure)
Approximately neutral burning is desired.
SOLUTION
a. Basic Design. The total impulse / and propellant weight at sea level wb are
1 = = = =
obtained from Eqs. 2-2 and 2-5. / Fth l,wb 20,000 x 5.0 JOO, 000 lbf
1
=
sec. The propellant weight is 100,000/240 417 !bf. Allowing for a loss of 2%
for manufacturing tolerances and slivers, the total propellant weight is 1.02 x
417 = 425 !bf. The volume required for this propellant Vh is given by Vb =
wb/ Pb= 425/0.066 = 6439 in.3 . The web thickness b = rtb = 0.80 x 5 = 4.0 in.
b. Case Dimensions. The outside diameter is fixed at 16.0 in. Heat-treated steel with
an ultimate tensile strength of 220,000 psi is to be used. The wall thickness t can
be determined from Eq. 14-1 for simple circumferential stress as
t = (pr/ D)/(2o'). The value of Pr depends on the safety factor selected, which
in turn depends on the heating of the wall, the prior experience with the mate
rial, and so on; a safety factor of 2.0 is suggested to allow for surface scratches,
combined stresses and welds, and rough field handling. The value of D is the
average diameter to the center of the wall. The wall thickness t is
= =
l 2.0 X JOQQ X 15.83/(2 X 220,000) 0.086 in.
A spherical head end and a spherical segment at the nozzle end similar to Fig.
11-1 is assumed.
c. Grain Configuration. The grain will be cast into the case but will be thermally
isolated from the case with an elastomeric insulator with an average thickness of
0.100 in. inside the case; the actual thickness will be less than 0.10 in. in the
cylindrical and forward closure regions, but thicker in the nozzle entry area. The
outside diameter D for the grain is determined from the case thickness and liner
to be 16.0 - 2 x 0.086 - 2 x O. IO= 15.62 in. The inside diameter D; of a simple
hollow cylinder grain would be the outside diameter D minus twice the web
0
thickness or D; = 15.62 - 2 x 4.0 = 7.62 in. For a simple cylindrical grain, the
volume determines the effective length, which can be determined from the equa
tion
Vb= 4Jr L(D 02
-
D;2 )
L = 6439 x 4 = 44.05 in.
rr(l 5.622 - 7.622)
The web fraction would be 2b/D =8/15.62=0.512. The L/D is (approxi
0 0
mately) 44.05/15.62 = 2.82.
For grains with this web fraction and this L/ D ratio, Table 11---4 suggests the
0
use of an internal burning tube with some fins for a cone. A conocyl configura
tion is selected, although a slotted tube or fins would also be satisfactory. These
grain shapes are shown in Figs. 11-1 and 11-17. The initial or average burning
=
area will be found from Eqs. 11-1 and 2-5: namely F = 1i'/ PhAbr/
5 5
574 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
A b -_ _ P! b_ rI _ s -_ 0 . 0 66 2 X0 , 00 .0 80 X 24 0 _ - I 57 8 ·3 m. . 2
The actual grain now has to be designed into the case with spherical ends, so it
will not be a simple cylindrical grain. The approximate volume occupied by the
grain is found by subtracting the perforation volume from the chamber volume.
There is a full hemisphere at the head end and a partial hemisphere of propellant
at the nozzle end (0.6 volume of a full hemisphere).
Vb= !(n/6)D~(I + 0.6) + (n/4)D;L - (n/4)Dt(L + D;/2 + 0.3D;/2) = 6439 in.3
This is solved for L, with D = I 5.62 in. and the inside diameter D; = 7.62 in.
The answer is L = 36.34 in. The initial internal hollow tube burn area is about
nD;(L + D;/2 + 0.3D;/2) = I I 13 in.2
The desired burn area of 1578 in.2 is larger by about 465 in.2 . Therefore, an
additional burn surface area of 465 in.2 will have to be designed into the cones
of a conocyl configuration or as slots in a slotted tube design. Actually, a
detailed geometrical study should be made analyzing the instantaneous burn
surface after arbitrary short time intervals and selecting a detailed grain con
figuration where Ab stays approximately constant. This example does not go
through a preliminary stress and elongation analysis, but it should be done.
d. Nozzle Design. From Chapter 3 the nozzle parameters can be determined. The
thrust coefficient CF can be found from curves of Figs. 3-6, 3-7, and 3-8 or Eq.
3-30 for k = l.25 and a pressure ratio of PIIP2 = 1000/3 = 333. Then
CF= 1.73. The throat area is from Eq. 3-31:
A = F/PICF = 20,000/(1000 x 1.73) = I 1.56 in.2
1
The throat diameter is D = 3.836 in. The nozzle area ratio for optimum expan
1
sion (Fig. 3-6) A /A is about 27. The exit area and diameter are therefore
2 1
about Ae = 312 in.2 and De= 19.93 in. However, this is larger than the max
imum vehicle diameter of 16.0 in. (A 2 = 201 in.2 ), which is the maximum for the
outside of the nozzle exit. Allowing for an exit cone thickness of 0. IO in., the
internal nozzle exit diameter D 2 is I 5.80 in. and A 2 is I 96 in.2 . This would allow
only a maximum area ratio of 196/11.56 or 16.95. Since the CF values are not
changed appreciably for this new area ratio, it can be assumed that the nozzle
throat area is unchanged.
This nozzle can have a thin wall in the exit cone, but requires heavy ablative
materials, probably in several layers near the throat and convergent nozzle
regions. The thermal and structural analysis of the nozzle is not shown here.
c. Weight Estimate. The steel case weight (assume a cylinder with two spherical
ends and that steel weight density is 0.3 lbf/in.3 ) is
PROBLEMS 575
t:rrDLp + (:rr/4)tD2 p = 0.086:rr 15.83 x 36.34 x 0.3
+ 0.785 X 0.086 X 15.832 X 0.3
= 50.9 !bf
With attachments, flanges, igniter, and pressure tap bosses, this is increased to
57.0 lb. The nozzle weight is composed of the weights of the individual parts,
estimated for their densities and geometries. This example does not go through
the detailed calculations, but merely gives the result of 30.2 lb. Assume an
expended igniter propellant weight of 2.0 lb and a full igniter weight of 5.0
lb. The total weight then is
Case weight at sea level 57.0 !bf
Liner /insulator 14.2 !bf
Nozzle, including fasteners 30.2 !bf
Igniter case and wires 2.0 !bf
Total inert hardware weight 103.4 !bf
Igniter powder 3 !bf
Propellant (effective) 417 !bf
Unuseable propellant (2%) 8 !bf
Total weight 531.4 !bf
Propellant and igniter powder 420.0 !bf
f. Performance. The total impulse-to-weight ratio is I 00,000/531.4 = 188.2.
Comparison with I, shows this to be an acceptable value, indicating a good
performance. The total launch weight is 5010 + 531.4 = 5541 !bf, and the
=
weight at burnout or thrust termination is 5541--420 5121 !bf. The initial
and final thrust-to-weight ratios and accelerations are
F /w = 20,000/5541 = 3.61
F/11· = 20,000/5121 = 3.91
The acceleration in the direction of thrust is 3.61 times the gravitational accel
eration at start and 3.91 at burnout.
g. Erosive Burning. The ratio of the port area to the nozzle throat area at start is
=
(7.55/3.836)2 3.95. This is close to the limit of 4.0, and erosive burning is not
likely to be significant. A simple analysis of erosive burning in the conical cavity
should also be made, but it is not shown here.
PROBLEMS
1. In Figs. 13--4 and 14-16 it can be seen that higher pressures and higher heat transfer
rates promote faster ignition. One way to promote more rapid ignition is for the
nozzle to remain plugged until a certain minimum pressure has been reached, at
which time the nozzle plug will be ejected. Analyze the time saving achieved by
such a device, assuming that the igniter gas evolution follows Eqs. 11-3 and
576 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
11-11. Under what circumstances is this an effective method? Make assumptions
about cavity volume, propellant density, etc.
2. Compare a simple cylindrical case with hemispheric ends (ignore nozzle entry or
igniter flanges) for an alloy steel metal and two reinforced fiber (glass and car
bon)-wound filament case. Use the properties in Table 14-2 and thin shell structure
theory. Given:
Length of cylindrical portion 370 mm
Outside cylinder diameter 200 mm
Internal pressure 6 MPa
Web fraction 0.52
Insulator thickness (average)
for metal case 1.2 mm
for reinforced plastic case 3.0 mm
Volumetric propellant loading 88%
Propellant specific gravity 1.80
Specific impulse (actual) 248 sec
Nozzle igniter and mounting provisions 0.20 kg
Calculate and compare the theoretical propulsion system flight velocity (without
payload) in a gravity-free vacuum for these three cases.
3. The following data are given for a case that can be made of either alloy steel or fiber
reinforced plastic.
Type Metal Reinforced Plastic
Material D6aC Organic filament composite
(Kevlar)
Physical properties See Table 14-2
Poisson ratio 0.27 0.38
Coefficient of thermal expansions. 8 45
m/m-K x 10-6
Outside diameter (m) 0.30 0.30
Length of cylindrical section (111) 0.48 0.48
Hemispherical ends
Nozzle flange diameter (m) Ql6 0.16
Average temperature rise of case 55 45
material during operation ( F)
Determine the growth in diameter and length of the case due to pressurization,
heating, and the combined growth, and interpret the results.
4. A high-pressure helium gas tank at 8000 psi maximum storage pressure and 1.5 ft
internal diameter is proposed. Use a safety factor of 1.5 on the ultimate strength. The
following candidate materials are to be considered:
Kevlar fibers in an epoxy matrix (see Table 14-2)
Carbon fibers in an epoxy matrix
Heat-treated welded titanium alloy with an ultimate strength of 150.000 psi and a
weight density of 0.165 lb/in.3
REFERENCES 577
Determine the dimensions and sea level weight of these three tanks and discuss their
relative merits. To contain the high-pressure gas in a composite material that is
porous, it is also necessary to include a thin metal inner liner (such as 0.016 in.
thick aluminum) to prevent loss of gas; this liner will not really carry structural loads,
but its weight and volume need to be considered.
5. Make a simple sketch and determine the mass or sea level weight of a rocket motor
case that is made of alloy steel and is cylindrical with hemispherical ends. State any
assumptions you make about the method of attachment of the nozzle assembly and
the igniter at the forward end.
Outer case and vehicle diameters 20.0 in.
Length of cylinder portion of case 19.30 in.
Ultimate tensile strength 172.000 psi
Yield strength 151.300 psi
Safety factor on ultimate strength 1.65
Safety factor on yield strength 1.40
Nozzle bolt circle diameter 12.0 in.
Igniter case diameter (forward end) 3.00 in.
Chamber pressure, maximum 1520 psi
6. Design a solid propellant rocket motor with insulation and liner. Use the AP/Al
HTPB propellant from Table 11-3 for Orbus 6. The average thrust is 3600 !bf and
the average burn time is 25.0 sec. State all the assumptions and rules used in your
solution and give your reasons for them. Make simple sketches of a cross section and
a half section with overall dimensions (length and diameter), and determine the
approximate loaded propellant mass.
7. The STAR 27 rocket motor (Fig. 11-1 and Table 11-3) has an average erosion rate
of 0.0011 in./sec. (a) Determine the change in nozzle area, thrust, chamber pressure,
burn time, and mass flow at cut-off. (b) Also determine those same parameters for a
condition when, somehow, a poor grade of ITE material was used that had three
times the usual erosion rate. Comment on the difference and acceptability.
Answer: Nozzle area increases by about (a) 5.3% and (b) 14.7% and chamber pres
sure at cutoff decreases by approximately the same percentage.
REFERENCES
14--1. NASA, National Space Tramportation System, Vols. I and 2, U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, DC, June 1988.
14--2. M. Salita, "Simple Finite Element Analysis Model of 0-Ring Deformation and
Activation during Squeeze and Pressurization," Journal of Propulsion and
Power, Vol. 4, No. 6, November-December 1988.
14--3. J. H. Hildreth, "Advances in Solid Rocket Motor Nozzle Design and Analysis
Technology since 1970," Chapter 2; A. Truchot, "Design and Analysis of Solid
Rocket Motor Nozzle," Chapter 3; P. R. Evans, "Composite Motor Case
Design," Chapter 4; A. J. P. Denos!, "Design of Filament Wound Rocket
Cases," Chapter 5; H. Baham and G. P. Thorp, "Consideration for Designers
of Cases for small Solid Propellant Rocket Motors," Chapter 6; all in Design
578 SOLID ROCKET COMPONENTS AND MOTOR DESIGN
Methods in Solid Rocket Motors, AGARD Lecture Series LS 150, Advisory
Group for Aerospace Research and Development, NAT O, revised 1988.
14-4. B. H. Prescott and M. Macocha, "Nozzle Design," Chapter 6; M. Chase and G.
P. Thorp, "Solid Rocket Motor Case Design," Chapter 7; in G. E. Jensen and
D. W. Netzer, (Eds), Vol. 170, Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics,
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1996.
14--5. A. de Rouvray, E. Haug, and C. Stavrindis, "Analytical Computations for
Damage Tolerance Evaluations of Composite Laminate Structures," Acta
Astronautica, Vol. 15, No. 11, 1987, pp. 921-930.
14--6. D. Beziers and J.P. Denost, "Composite Curing: A New Process," A/AA Paper
89-2868, July 1989.
14--7. A. Groves, J. Margetson, and P. Stanley, "Design Nomograms for Metallic
Rocket Cases Reinforced with a Visco-elastic Fiber Over-wind," Journal of
Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 24, No. 5, September-October 1987, pp. 411--415.
14--8. S. Boraas, "Modeling Slag Deposition in Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Motor,"
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 21, No. !, January-February 1984.
14--9. P. Gentil, "Design and Development of a New Solid Rocket Motor Nozzle
Based on Carbon and Carbon-Ceramic Materials," A/AA Paper 88-3333, 1988.
14--10. "Solid Rocket Motor Igniters," NASA SP-8051, March 1971 (N71-30346).
14--11. R. Baunchalk, "High Mass Fraction Booster Demonstration," A/AA Paper 90-
2326, July 1990.
14--12. L. LoFiego, Practical Aspects of Igniter Design, Combustion Institute, Western
States Section, Menlo Park, CA, 1968 (AD 69-18361 ).
14--13. R. Fabrizi and A. Annovazzi, "Ariane 5 P230 Booster Grain Design and
Performance Study," A/AA Paper 89-2420, July 1989.
14--14. A. Truchot, "Overall Optimization of Solid Rocket Motors," Chapter 11 in
Design Methods in Solid Rocket Motors, AGARD Lecture Series LS 150,
Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development, NATO, revised
1988.
CHAPTER 15
HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
Terry A. Boardman*
Rocket propulsion concepts in which one component of the propellant is
stored in liquid phase while the other is stored in solid phase are called hybrid
propulsion systems. Such systems most commonly employ a liquid oxidizer
and solid fueit. Various combinations of solid fuels and liquid oxidizers as
well as liquid fuels and solid oxidizers have been experimentally evaluated for
use in hybrid rocket motors. Most common is the liquid oxidizer-solid fuel
concept shown in Fig. 15-1. Illustrated here is a large pressure-fed hybrid
booster configuration. The means of pressurizing the liquid oxidizer is not
an important element of hybrid technology and a turbopump system could
also perform this task) The oxidizer can be either a noncryogenic (storable) or
a cryogenic liquid, depending on the application requirements.
In this hybrid motor concept, oxidizer is injected into a precombustion or
vaporization chamber upstream of the primary fuel grain. The fuel grain con
tains numerous axial combustion ports that generate fuel vapor to react with
*This is a revision of Chapter 15 in the 6th edition of Rocket Propulsion Elements originally
authored by Terry A. Boardman, Alan Holzman, and George P. Sutton.
tThe term hybrid has also been applied to liquid monopropellant systems, electrical propulsion
systems where a resistor or electric arc raises the temperature of the reaction gases, solid propulsion
systems utilizing separate fuel-rich and oxidizer-rich propellant grains (so called solid-solid hybrid),
or the solid fuel ramjet that has a combustion cycle very similar to the hybrid concept discussed in
this chapter. The solid fuel ramjet is mentioned briefly in Chapter I.
tHybrid technology in this context is construed to encompass combustion physics, fuel grain
design, and materials selection for nozzle and internal case insulators. The choice of pressure
feeding or turbopump feeding oxidizer to the combustion chamber impacts vehicle performance
through differences in mass fraction and specific impulse, but is considered an element of liquid
propulsion technology rather than hybrid technology.
579
580 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
Pressurization system
L0 oxidizer
2
Systems tunnel
Graphite/aluminum L0 tank
2
( L -02 injector
I ..... r Inert HTPB fuel grain
- Graphite composite case
Combustion ports
Concept features
• Throttleable
• Inert fuel grain
• Simple injector
FIGURE 15--1. Large hybrid rocket booster concept capable of boosting the Space
Shuttle. It has an inert solid fuel grain, a pressurized liquid oxygen feed system, and
can be throttled.
the injected oxidizer. An aft mixing chamber is employed to ensure that all fuel
and oxidizer are burned before exiting the nozzle.
The main advantages of a hybrid rocket propulsion system are: (1) safety
during fabrication, storage, or operation without any possibility of explosion
or detonation; (2) start-stop-restart capabilities; (3) relatively low system cost;
(4) higher specific impulse than solid rocket motors and higher density-specific
impulse than liquid bi propellant engines; and (5) the ability to smoothly change
motor thrust over a wide range on demand.
The disadvantages of hybrid rocket propulsion systems are: (1) mixture ratio
and, hence, specific impulse will vary somewhat during steady-state operation
and throttling; (2) lower density-specific impulse than solid propellant systems;
(3) some fuel sliver must be retained in the combustion chamber at end-of
burn, which slightly reduces motor mass fraction; and (4) unproven propulsion
system feasibility at large scale.
15.1. APPLICATIONS AND PROPELLANTS
Hybrid propulsion is well suited to applications or missions requiring throt
tling, command shutdown and restart, long-duration missions requiring stor
able nontoxic propellants, or infrastructure operations (manufacturing and
15.1. APPLICATIONS AND PROPELLANTS 581
launch) that would benefit from a non-self-deflagrating propulsion system.
Such applications would include primary boost propulsion for space launch
vehicles, upper stages, and satellite maneuvering systems.
Many early hybrid rocket motor developments were aimed at target missiles
and low-cost tactical missile applications (Ref. 15-I). Other development
efforts focused on high-energy upper-stage motors. In recent years develop
ment efforts have concentrated on booster prototypes for space launch appli
cations. Design requirements for one target missile, which entered production
in the early 1970s, included a nominal thrust of 2200 N with an 8: 1 throttling
range, storable liquid oxidizer, and engine shutdown on command. Selected
propellants included a nitrogen tetroxide/nitrous oxide oxidizer and a hydro
carbon fuel grain composed of polymethylmethacrylate (plexiglass) and mag
nesium (Ref. 15-2). Values of vacuum-delivered specific impulse for such
storable propellant systems range between 230 and 280 sec. In another pro
gram (Ref. 15-3), a hybrid motor was developed for high-performance upper
stage applications with design requirements that included a nominal thrust
level of 22,240 N and an 8: I throttling range. Oxygen difluoride was selected
as the oxidizer for use with a lithium hydride/polybutadiene fuel grain.
Analytical and experimental investigations have been made using other high
performance propellants. High-energy oxidizers include fluorine/liquid oxygen
mixtures (FLOX) and chlorine/fluorine compounds such as CIF 3 and CIF 5.
Complementary high-energy fuels are typically hydrides of light metals, such as
beryllium, lithium, and aluminum, mixed with a suitable polymeric binder
(Ref. 15--4). Delivered vacuum-specific impulse levels for these high-energy
hybrid propellants are in the 350 to 380 sec range, depending on nozzle expan
sion ratio. Combustion efficiencies of 95% of theoretical values have been
achieved in tests with these propellants; however, none of these exotic formula
tion systems have seen use on flight vehicles.
A more practical, although lower energy, upper-stage hybrid propellant
system is 90 to 95% hydrogen peroxide oxidizer combined with hydroxyl
terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) fuel. Hydrogen peroxide is considered stor
able for time periods typical of upper-stage mission cycles (oxidizer tanking to
mission completion on the order of several months) and is relatively inexpen
sive. In solid rocket motors, HTPB is used as the binder to consolidate the
aluminum fuel and ammonium perchlorate oxidizer matrix. In a hybrid, HTPB
becomes the entire fuel constituent. HTPB is low cost, processes easily, and will
not self-deflagrate under any conditions.
The propellant system of choice for large hybrid booster applications is
liquid oxygen (LOX) oxidizer and HTPB fuel. Liquid oxygen is a widely
used oxidizer in the space launch industry, is relatively safe, and delivers
high performance at low cost. This hybrid propellant combination produces
a nontoxic, relatively smoke-free exhaust. The LOX/HTPB propellant combi
nation favored for booster applications is chemically and performance-wise
equivalent to a LOX-kerosene bipropellant system.
582 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
Where a smoky exhaust is not a detriment, hybrid propellants for certain
applications may benefit from the addition of powdered aluminum to the fuel.
This increases the combustion temperature, reduces the stoichiometric mixture
ratio, and increases fuel density as well as overall density-specific impulse.
Although density-specific impulse (p J is increased, addition of aluminum
1 5)
to the fuel actually reduces specific impulse. This occurs because the increase
in flame temperature gained by adding aluminum does not compensate for the
increase in molecular weight of the exhaust products. Figure 15-2 illustrates
theoretical vacuum specific impulse levels (calculated at 1000 psia chamber
pressure and a 10:1 nozzle expansion ratio) for a variety of cryogenic and
storable oxidizers used in conjunction with HTPB fuel. Table 15-1 tabulates
the heat of formation for HTPB reacted with various oxidizers.
Large hybrid development work completed to date has focused on motors
having a thrust level of approximately 1,112,000 N or 250,000 !bf. The
American Rocket Company first tested a 250,000 !bf thrust LOX/HTPB
hybrid in 1993 (Ref. 15-5). In 1999, a consortium of aerospace companies
also tested several 250,000 !bf thrust LOX/HTPB hybrid prototypes as a
candidate strap-on booster for space launch vehicles (see Ref. 15-6 and
Fig. 15-3). In these motors, polycyclopentadiene (PCPD) is added to the
C:
·;0; ;
"C':
Cl.
X
..C..l.)
0
.....
·;;;
Cl.
0 0 300
.0.. ..
"'
u
Cl)
!!!,
~
200 ........ ~...__~..__~..__~..__~..._~..._~..._~...._~...._~...._~_._~~
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Mixture ratio
FIGURE 15--2. Theoretical vacuum specific impulse of selected oxidizers reacted with
hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene fuel. The I, of the 0 /HTPB propellant is compar
2
able to that of a LOX/kerosene bipropellant engine.
15.1. APPLICATIONS AND PROPELLANTS 583
TABLE 15-1. Thermochemical Properties of Selected Oxidizers Reacted with HTPB
Fuel
Boiling Point Density .6. Ha
I
3
Oxidizer Type (°C) (g/cm ) (kcal/mo!)
02 Cryogenic -183 1.149 -3.1
F2 Cryogenic -188 1.696 -3.0
03 Cryogenic -112 1.614 +30.9
F20 Cryogenic -145 1.650 +2.5
F202 Cryogenic -57 1.450 +4.7
N20 Cryogenic -88 1.226 + 15.5
N204 Storable +21 1.449 +2.3
IRFNAb Storable +80 to + 120 1.583 -41.0
H202 Storable +150 1.463 44.8
CI02 Storable +II 1.640 +24.7
CIF3 Storable +II 1.810 -44.4
a t;JH is the heat of formation as defined in Chapter 5.
blnhibited red fuming nitric acid.
HTPB fuel to increase fuel density by about 10% over HTPB alone. The
motors were designed to operate for 80 sec at a LOX flow rate of 600 lbm/sec
with a maximum chamber pressure of 900 psi. Figure 15-4 illustrates a cross
section of one motor configuration. Test results indicated additional work is
necessary to develop large hybrid motor configurations that exhibit stable
combustion throughout the motor burn, and in understanding fuel regres
sion-rate scale-up factors.
A hybrid fuel grain is ignited by providing a source of heat, which
initiates gasification of the solid fuel grain at the head end of the motor.
Subsequent initiation of oxidizer flow provides the required flame spreading
to fully ignite the motor. Ignition is typically accomplished by injection of a
hypergolic fluid into the motor combustion chamber. Using the motor
described in Fig. 15-4 as an example, a mixture of triethyl aluminum
(TEA) and triethyl borane (TEB) is injected into the vaporization chamber.
The TEA/TEB mixture ignites spontaneously on contact with air in the
combustion chamber, vaporizing fuel in the dome region. Subsequent injec
tion of liquid oxygen completes ignition of the motor. TEA/TEB mixtures
are currently used for motor ignition in the Atlas and Delta commercial
launch vehicles. Experimenters (Refs. 15-7 and 15-8) have described solid
fuels that will ignite spontaneously at ambient temperature and pressure
when sprayed with specific oxidizers other than LOX. Small hybrid motors,
such as those used in a laboratory environment with gaseous oxygen oxidi
zer, are often electrically ignited by passing current through a resistor such
as steel wool located in the combustion port, or by use of a propane or
hydrogen ignition system.
FIGURE 15-3. Static tests of a 250,000 !bf thrust hybrid motor prototype demonstrated that additional work is
needed to understand fuel regression and combustion stability issues at large scale. The fuel case shown here is
approximately 6.3 ft diameter.
15.2. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION 585
Simulated Submerged
Flex Bearing Nozzle
SECTION A-A SECTION 8-B (3-D carbon-carbon throat)
PU oIU na ss onlc Transducer Vapo Cri oz na ft oio gn
u
raC llh oa nm ber CM ona fin
lg
uG rara lli on
n
B
Flow Deftec1or
8 HTPB/PCPD Fuel
EPDM Insulation
-------------512 In. --------------.i
--------------- S~in -------------~
FIGURE 15-4. 250,000 !bf thrust hybrid booster design parameters and section of fuel
grain and nozzle. The vaporization chamber fins and flow deflector are designed to
promote flame holding in combustion ports.
Maximum operating pressure 900 psia
Maximum vacuum thrust 250,000 !bf
Throat diameter, initial 14.60 in.
Nozzle expansion ratio, initial 12
Liquid oxygen flow rate 420 to 600 lbm/sec (throttlable)
Fuel weight 45,700 !bf
Burn time 80 sec
15.2. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION
A characteristic operating feature of hybrids is that the fuel regression rate
is typically less than one-third that of composite soiid rocket propellants. It
is very difficult to obtain fuel regression rates comparable to propellant
burn rates in solid rocket motors. Consequently, practical high-thrust hybrid
motor designs must have multiple perforations (combustion ports) in the
fuel grain to produce the required fuel surface area. The performance of
a hybrid motor (defined in terms of delivered specific impulse) depends
critically on the degree of flow mixing attained in the combustion chamber.
High performance stems from high combustion efficiency that is a direct
function of the thoroughness with which unburned oxidizer exhausting from
the combustion port is mixed with unburned fuel from within sublayers of
the boundary layer. Multiple combustion ports serve to promote high com
bustion efficiency as a result of the turbulent mixing environment for
unreacted fuel and oxidizer in the mixing chamber region downstream of
the fuel grain.
586 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
A cross section of a typical high-thrust hybrid fuel grain is shown in Fig.
15-5. The number of combustion ports required is a motor optimization prob
lem that must account for the desired thrust level, acceptable shifts in mixture
ratio during burn, motor length and diameter constraints, and desired oxidizer
mass velocity. Hybrid rocket motor design typically begins by specifying a
desired thrust level and a propellant system. Subsequently, selection of the
desired operating oxidizer-to-fuel mixture ratio (0/F ratio) determines the
propellant characteristic velocity. Once the characteristic velocity and mixture
ratio are specified, the total propellant flow rate and the subsequent split
between oxidizer and fuel flow rates necessary to produce the required thrust
level can be computed. The necessary fuel flow rate in a hybrid is determined
by the total fuel surface area (perimeter and length of the combustion ports)
and the fuel regression rate. As will be shown in subsequent sections, the fuel
regression rate is primarily determined by the oxidizer mass velocity, also called
oxidizer flux. The oxidizer flux is equal to the mass flow rate of oxidizer in a
combustion port divided by the port cross-sectional area. Thus the fuel flow
rate is intrinsically linked to the oxidizer flow rate and cannot be independently
specified, as in a liquid rocket engine.
Much of the technology from liquid and solid propellant rockets is directly
applicable to hybrid rockets; the main differences lie in the driving mechanisms
for solid propellant burning and hybrid fuel regression. In a solid system, the
oxidizer and fuel ingredients are well mixed during the propellant manufactur
ing process. Combustion occurs as a result of heterogeneous chemical reactions
FIGURE 15-5. Cross-sectional sketch of a multi-port fuel grain with web thickness
between ports twice that of the outer wall. Multiple ports are required to achieve the
large fuel surface area necessary for high fuel flow rates.
15.2. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION 587
on or very near the surface of the solid propellant. The solid propellant burning
rate is controlled by chamber pressure and follows the well-established law of
Eq. 11-3; it is Eq. 15-1 in this chapter.
r. = apn (15-1)
1
where a and n are empirical coefficients derived experimentally for specific
propellant formulations. Since the rate of propellant gasification per unit
area in a solid rocket motor, at a given propellant bulk temperature and in
the absence of erosive burning, is determined only by chamber pressure, motor
thrust is predetermined by the initial propellant grain surface area and grain
geometrical characteristics. Throttling or extinguishment is very difficult to
achieve in practical solid rocket motor configurations since the fuel and oxidi
zer cannot be separated.
As the fuel grain of a hybrid typically contains no oxidizer, the combustion
process and hence the regression of the fuel surface is markedly different from
that of a solid rocket motor. Because the solid fuel must be vaporized before
combustion can occur, the fuel surface regression is intrinsically related to the
coupling of combustion port aerodynamics and heat transfer to the fuel grain
surface. The primary combustion region over the fuel grain surface has been
shown to be limited to a relatively narrow flame zone occurring within the fuel
grain boundary layer (Ref. 15-9). Factors affecting the development of the fuel
grain boundary layer and, hence, fuel regression characteristics include pres
sure, gas temperature, grain composition, combustion port oxidizer mass flow
rate, and combustion port length. The heat transfer relationships between the
gas and solid phase depend on whether the boundary layer is laminar or
turbulent. In a typical hybrid using oxygen as the oxidizer, the Reynolds num
ber per unit length is on the order of I to 2 x 105 per inch of grain length for
flux levels between 0.3 and 0.6 lbm/sec/in.2 (see Appendix 4 for definitions of
non-dimensional parameters used in hybrid boundary layer analyses). Thus,
the properties of a turbulent boundary layer govern the convective heat trans
fer processes to non-metallized fuel grains.
In hybrids with metallized fuel grains, radiation from the metal oxide par
ticle cloud in the combustion port contribues a major portion of the total heat
flux to the fuel grain. The local regression rate of the fuel is also quite sensitive
to the general turbulence level of the combustion port gas flow (Refs. 15-10
and 15-11). Localized combustion gas eddies or recirculation zones adjacent to
the fuel surface act to significantly enhance the regression rate in these areas.
Hybrid fuel regression rate is thought to be insensitive to fuel grain bulk
temperatures over the range in which solid rocket motors may operate
(-65°F to l 65°F). This is due to the absence of heterogeneous fuel/oxidizer
reactions at the fuel surface (in which the reaction rates are temperature depen
dent) and because, over the above temperature range, the change in heat con
tent of the solid fuel is small compared to the heat necessary to initiate
vaporization of the fuel surface.
588 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
Selection of fuel ingredients can also have a significant impact on the grain
regression rate, which is largely a function of the energy required to convert
the fuel from solid to vapor phase (hv). This energy is called the heat of
gasification and, for polymeric fuels, includes the energy required to break
polymer chains (heat of depolymerization) and the heat required to convert
polymer fragments to gaseous phase (heat of vaporization). The term "heat
of vaporization" is often used as a catchall phrase to include all decomposi
tion mechanisms in hybrid fuels. In non-metallized fuels, low heats of gasi
fication tend to produce higher regression rates. In metallized fuels, the
addition of ultra-fine aluminum (UF Al) powder (particle sizes on the order
of 0.05 µm to 0.1 µm) to HTPB has been noted to significantly increase the
fuel regresion rate relative to a pure HTPB baseline (see Ref. 15-12 and Fig.
15-6). Hybrid propellants containing aluminum particles with diameters typi
cal of those used in solid rocket propellants (40 µm to 400 µm) do not exhibit
this effect.
Figure 15-7 depicts a simplified model of the hybrid combustion process for
a non-metallized (non-radiating) fuel system. Fuel is vaporized as a result of
heat transferred from the flame zone to the fuel mass. Vaporized fuel is con
vected upward toward the flame zone while oxidizer from the free stream (core
flow) is transported to the flame zone by diffusion and flow turbulence. The
flame is established at a location within the boundary layer determined by the
stoichiometric conditions under which combustion can occur. The thickness of
the flame is determined primarily by the rate at which the oxidation reaction
~ 70
f-
J:
~ 60
::,
a.
.9 50
0
Qg)-
40
~
£
.§: 30
Q)
~
~ 20
(.)
£
'd<. 10
5 10 15 20 25
Mass fraction of UFAI (wt% of total HTPB fuel)
FIGURE 15----6. Ultra-fine aluminum (UFAL) powder mixed with HTPB significantly
increases the fuel regression rate.
15.2. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND GRAIN -CONFIGURATION 589
--
To liquid inJector To nozzle
Border of boundary layer
Combustion port
Diffusion
flame zone
Fuel vapor
zone
Motor case
FIGURE 15--7. Simplified model of the diffusion-controlled hybrid combustion pro
cess, illustrating the flame zone embedded within the fuel boundary layer.
occurs. This rate is largely dependent on pressure and typically follows an
Arrhenius relationship.
The mechanisms of heat transfer to the fuel grain surface in a hybrid are
convection and radiation. In a non-metallized fuel grain, at pressures and flux
levels of interest for propulsion applications, heat transferred by convection is
thought to be much larger than that transferred by gas-phase radiation or
radiation from soot particles in the flow. As a result, the basic characteristics
of fuel grain regression may be explored via an analysis of convective heat
transfer in a turbulent boundary layer (see Appendix 4). Considering an energy
balance at the fuel grain surface, one may derive an expression for the fuel
surface regression rate as
; =
0.03G6o.&- (~) o· 2 ! 3°23
(15-2)
Pf X
where G is the free stream propellant mass velocity (total oxidizer and fuel flow
per unit area) in a combustion port at any given axial location x, PJ is the solid
phase fuel density, µ is the combustion gas viscosity, and f3 is the non-dimen
sionalized fuel mass flux, resulting from fuel vaporization, evaluated at the fuel
surface. The parameter f3 is frequently referred to as a blowing coefficient (see
Appendices 4 and 5 for further discussion of /3). Equation 15-2 indicates that
hybrid fuel regression rate for a non-radiative system is strongly dependent on
G and rather weakly dependent on axial location (x) and fuel blowing char-
590 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
acteristics (/3). One may also note that the regression rate is not explicitly
dependent on chamber pressure in this derivation. In fact, experiments have
shown that the regression rate for some fuels exhibits little or no dependence
on chamber pressure whereas the regression rate for others exhibits a strong
dependence. In particular, metallized hybrid fuel systems exhibit a pronounced
pressure dependence (Ref. 15-13 ).
As the combustion port length increases, fuel added to the port mass flow
increases the total port mass flux. In ports operating at low mixture ratios, the
fuel mass increase may be on the same order as the oxidizer mass flow initially
entering the port. Given the weak dependence of regression rate on x in Eq. 15-
2, one would therefore expect the fuel regression rate to increase with increas
ing axial length due to the increase in G. While this generally turns out to be the
case, fuel regression rate has been observed to both increase and decrease with
increasing x, depending on specifics of the motor configuration. In practice,
axial fuel regression characteristics are strongly influenced by oxidizer injection
and pre-combustion/vaporization chamber design characteristics. General
trends that have been measured in hybrid combustion ports include the follow
ing as x increases: total mass flux increases; boundary layer thickness grows;
flame standoff from the fuel surface increases; combustion port average gas
temperature increases; oxidizer concentration decreases.
Since the blowing coefficient f3 is not only an aerodynamic parameter but
also a thermochemical parameter (see Appendix 5) and the x dependency is of
the same order as f3 in Eq. 15-2, this expression is often simplified for purposes
of preliminary engineering design by lumping effects of x, {3, fuel density, and
gas viscosity into one parameter, a. In practice, deviations from the theoretical
0.8 power mass velocity dependency are also often noted. The result of sim
plifying Eq. 15-2 is to retain the functional form but fit the free constants a and
n using experimental data obtained from characterizing specific fuel and oxi
dizer combinations. One functional form useful for engineering evaluations is
r = aG~ (15-3)
where G is the oxidizer mass velocity, which is equal at any time to the
0 r
oxidizer flow rate divided by the combustion port area. The value of has
been observed to vary from 0.05 in./sec to 0.2 in./sec. Likewise, n has been
observed to fall in a range between 0.4 and 0. 7. An alternative form of Eq. 15-
3, to account for an observed pressure and/or port diameter dependency, is
given as
r· = a Gn o Pm I DI p (15--4)
where m and l have been observed to vary between zero and 0.25 and zero and
0. 7, respectively.
Figure 15-8 illustrates surface regression rate data obtained for the combus
tion of HTPB fuel grains and gaseous oxygen in rocket motor tests at two
15.2. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND GRAIN CONFIGURATION 591
0 0.1
Cl)
~ • Labscale motor o 11-in diameter motor
§, - ;-= 0.10468·686
-
;-= o.o6s68·77 (Dp/3)°-71
Cl)
~
C:
0
·u5
Cl)
~
Ol
~
Qi
:J
u.. 0.01 ~--~-~-~~~~~---~-~~~~~~
0.01 0.1
Oxygen mass velocity (lbm/sec-in~)
FIGURE 15-8. Hybrid regression rate has been observed to decrease as motor scale
(combustion port diameter) increases.
different scales. The first data set were obtained by testing fuel grains in a small
laboratory-scale (2-in. motor diameter with a 0.43-in. combustion port dia
meter) rocket at varying gaseous oxygen flux levels (Ref. 15-14). A least
squares regression analysis, performed to determine the constants in Eq. I 5-
3, indicates that, at this scale, the following relationship best describes the
regression rate characteristics of HTPB as a function of oxygen mass flux:
'H.
TPB
= 0 · 104G0
o
·681 (15-5)
Data obtained with the same propellant system in a larger I I-in. diameter
hybrid motor with combustion port diameters ranging between 3 and 6 in.
exhibited a relatively strong dependence on combustion port diameter (Ref.
15-15). Data from this testing was best matched with an expression in the form
ofEq. 15-4:
(15-6)
The difference in fuel regression characteristics between the two motor scales
illustrates one of the central difficulties of hybrid motor design, i.e., that of
scaling ballistic performance. Scaling issues in hybrid motors are currently not
well understood (in part because of the lack of sufficient valid data for different
motor sizes) and the literature abounds with empirical regression rate scaling
relationships (Ref. 15-16). Computational fluid dynamic approaches to resol
ving the hybrid flow field and calculating fuel surface heating appear to offer
the best hope of analytically evaluating scale effects.
The dynamic behavior of a hybrid rocket may be analyzed using the con
tinuity equation
(15-7)
592 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
that expresses that the time rate of change of high-pressure gas inside the
chamber is equal to the difference between the hot gas generated from inflow
of liquid oxidizer, plus that generated from the regressing fuel surface, and the
flow through the nozzle. Equation 15-7 may be rewritten as
B(P1 Vi) . . P1A1
=m +m --- (15-8)
Bt O 1 c*
When steady state is reached, Eq. 15-8 reduces to
. . . P1A1
m = m + m.t· = - (15-9)
0 c*
The thrust of a hybrid rocket motor can then be expressed as
(15-10)
Changing the thrust or throttling of a hybrid is achieved by changing the
oxidizer flow rate, usually by means of a throttling valve in the oxidizer feed
line. The fuel flow is a function of the oxidizer flow but not necessarily a linear
function. For circular port geometries with radius R, Eq. 15-3 may be recast as
)"
(
r. -
-a
-m. o
- (15-11)
nR 2
The mass production rate of fuel is given by
(15-12)
where Ab is the combustion port surface area and L is the port length.
Combining Eqs. 15-11 and 15-12, one obtains the fuel production rate in
terms of port radius and oxidizer mass flow rate:
m· l= 2 JT l-11 Pt L am· o n RI-211 (15-13)
From this expression one will note that, for the particular value of n = !, the
fuel mass flow rate is independent of combustion port radius and varies as the
square root of oxidizer mass flow rate. For such a situation, if the oxidizer flow
is reduced to one-half of its rated value, then the fuel flow will be reduced by a
factor of 0.707 and the motor thrust, which depends on the total propellant
flow (rry + 112 will not vary linearly with the change in oxidizer flow. Usually,
0),
as the thrust is decreased by reducing the oxizider flow, the mixture ratio
(rn /m ) is reduced, becoming increasingly fuel rich. In some hybrid motor
0 1
concepts, a portion of the oxidizer is injected in a mixing chamber downstream
of the fuel grain in order to maintain a more constant mixture ratio. However,
15.3. DESIGN EXAMPLE 593
for most applications, the system design can be optimized over the range of
mixture ratios encountered with very little degradation of average specific
impulse due to throttling.
Equation 15-13 also indicates that, for constant oxidizer flow, fuel produc
f !,
tion will increase with increasing port radius if n < For n > fuel production
will decrease with increasing port radius.
For a fuel grain incorporating N circular combustion ports, Eq. 15-11 can
be simply integrated to give combustion port radius, instantaneous fuel flow
rate, instantaneous mixture ratio, and total fuel consumed as functions of burn
time:
Combustion port radius R as a function of time and oxidizer flow rate:
!)(:;) I
R(t) = {a (2n + nt + R1n+I} ,n+i (15-14)
Instantaneous fuel flow rate:
m) n{ (m ),,
m1(t) = 2nN P1La ( n; a(2n + I) n; t + R1n+I }\+l~ (15-15)
Instantaneous mixture ratio:
~o(t)=-1-(mo) l"+\
. . (1-n) · n
{a(2n+l)(mo) t+R1n+1}" (15-16)
m 2p La nN nN
1 1
Total fuel consumed:
(15-17)
where Lis the fuel grain length, Ri is the initial port radius, N is the number of
combustion ports of radius Ri in the fuel grain, and m and rry are the total
0
oxidizer and fuel flow rates, respectively. Although the above equations are
strictly valid only for circular combustion ports, they may be used to give a
qualitative understanding of hybrid motor behavior which is applicable to the
burnout of non-circular ports as well.
15.3. DESIGN EXAMPLE
The preliminary design problem typically posed is to determine the approxi
mate size of a hybrid booster, given numerous system requirements and design
assumptions. Suppose that the operating characteristics of a Space Shuttle-
594 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
class hybrid rocket booster are to be determined, given the following initial
design requirements:
Fuel HTPB
Oxidizer Liquid oxygen
Required booster initial thrust (vacuum) 3.] X ]06 ]bf
Burn time 120 sec
Fuel grain outside diameter 150 in.
Initial chamber pressure 700 psia
Initial mixture ratio 2.0
Initial expansion ratio 7.72
Using the ratio of specific heats from Table 15-2 and the given initial nozzle
expansion ratio, the vacuum thrust coefficient is determined from tables or
direct calculation to be 1.735. Initial nozzle throat area and throat diameter
are determined from
A=~- 3.1 x 106lbf =2552.5 in.2
1 CF,Pl (1.735)(700 lbf/in.2 )
then D = 57.01 in. From the data of Table 15-2 for c* versus mixture ratio, c*
1
corresponding to an initial mixture ratio of 2.0 is 5912 ft/sec. Theoretical c*
values are typically degraded to account for combustion inefficiency due to
incomplete oxidizer/fuel mixing. Using a factor of95%, the delivered c* is 5616
ft/sec. Total initial propellant flow rate can now be determined as
TABLE 15-2. Theoretical Characteristic Velocity c* and Ratio of Specific Heats k
for Reaction Gases of Liquid Oxygen-HTPB Fuel
Mass Mixture Ratio c*(ft/sec) k
1.0 4825 1.308
1.2 5180 1.282
1.4 5543 1.239
1.6 5767 1.201
1.8 5882 1.171
2.0 5912 1.152
2.2 5885 1.143
2.4 5831 1.138
2.6 5768 1.135
2.8 5703 1.133
3.0 5639 1.132
15.3. DESIGN EXAMPLE 595
A 32. I 74 lbm-ft) (700 !bf/in. 2 )(2552.5 m. . 2 )
= = ( 2 =
111 goPI 1 !bf-sec IO 236 lbm/sec
c* (0.95)(5912 ft/sec2 ) '
Noting that mixture ratio is defined as
initial fuel and oxidizer flow rates follow at the initial mixture ratio of 2.0:
m = 111 + mr = mr(r + I)
0
. 10,236 lbm/sec lb
m1 = = 3412 m/sec
3
= =
111 10,236 - 3412 6824 lbm/sec
0
Figure l 5-9a illustrates a candidate seven-circular-port symmetric fuel grain
configuration. The dashed lines represent the diameters to which the combus
tion ports burn at the end of 120 sec. The problem is to determine the initial
port diameter such that, at the end of the specified 120-sec burn time, the grain
diameter constraint of I 50 in. is satisfied. The unknown quantity in this prob
lem is the initial combustion port radius, Ri, and the fuel burn distance, db· In
terms of initial port radius, the burn distance can be expressed via Eq. 15-I 4 as
db = R(t, RJl1=120 - Ri
The fuel grain diameter requirement of I 50 in. is satisfied by the following
relation:
+
150 in.= 6Ri 6dh
Sub-scale motor test data indicate that one expression for the fuel surface
regression rate can be described by Eq. I 5-5. Assuming that these data are
valid for the flux levels and port diameters under consideration (ignoring
potential regression rate scaling issues), the above two relations can be com
bined to solve for the initial port radius and distance burned, yielding
Ri = 14.32 in. db= 10.68 in.
Knowing the initial port radius, the oxidizer mass velocity can be determined:
G = ~ = 6824 lbm/sec = 1.51 lbm in.2-sec
0 N AP 7rr( I 4.32 in.)2 I
The initial fuel regression rate may be explicitly determined from Eq. 15-5:
596 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
Dh = 28.64 in.
Motor case
db= 10.68 in.
(b)
FIGURE 15-9. (a) Circular fuel grain combustion ports are volumetrically inefficient
and leave large slivers at burnout. (b) Quadrilateral port hybrid grain configuration
minimizes residual fuel sliver at burnout.
ri = 0.104G~/81 = 0.104(1.51 lbm/ft2-sec)°-681 = 0.138 in./sec
From the initial fuel mass flow rate, determined to be 3412 lbm/sec, the fuel
grain length required for a seven-circular-port design may be found from Eq.
15-12:
(3412 lbm/sec)/7 = _ in.
11896
n(28.65 in.)(0.033 lbm/in.3)(0.138 in./ sec)
Using Eqs. 15-9, 15-10, 15-15, 15-16, and 15-17, while neglecting effects of
throat erosion, the general operating characteristics of the booster may be
computed with respect to time. The total fuel and oxidizer required for a
120-sec burn time are determined to be 362,577 and 818,880 lbm respectively.
The total propellant mass required is therefore 1,181,457 lbm.
15.3. DESIGN EXAMPLE 597
Selection of circular fuel ports is not an efficient way of designing a hybrid
grain since large fuel slivers will remain at the end of burn. In the preceding
example, a sliver fraction (1 minus fuel consumed divided by fuel loaded) of
29.8% can be calculated. Recognizing that uniform burn distances around each
port, as well as between combustion ports and the case wall, will minimize
residual fuel sliver, the outer ring of circular ports may be replaced with quad
rilateral-shaped ports. Such a grain is illustrated in Fig. l 5-9b. If, as before, the
grain diameter is constrained to be 150 in., the grain geometry is uniquely
determined by specification of the initial fuel and oxidizer flow rates, number
of ports, burn time, and the requirement that the burn distance around each
port be equal. Additionally, the hydraulic diameter Dh (four times port area
divided by port perimeter) of all ports should be equal to assure that all ports
have the same mass flow rate.
For this example, the nine-port grain configuration results in a theoretical
fuel sliver fraction of 4.3%. In reality, the sliver fraction for both designs will
be somewhat greater than theoretical values since some web must be designed
to remain between ports at the end of the burn duration to prevent slivers from
being expelled out of the nozzle. Table 15-3 compares key features of the
circular port grain design (Fig. I 5-9a) and the quadrilateral grain design
(Fig. 15-9b).
In this example, the fuel consumed by the quadrilateral port design is less
than that consumed by the circular port design. Therefore, the total impulse of
the two designs will be different. If fuel consumed were constrained to be the
same in each design, one would find that, as the number of quadrilateral fuel
ports would be increased, the grain length would decrease and grain diameter
would increase. In practice, the hybrid motor designer must carefully balance
TABLE 15-3. Comparison of Circular Port and Quadrilateral Port Grain Designs
Circular Quadrilateral
Design Parameter Port Port
Oxidizer flow rate (lbm/sec) 6824 6824
Initial fuel flow rate (lbm/sec) 3412 3412
Burn time (sec) 120 120
Grain diameter (in.) 150 150
Number of combustion ports 7 9
Oxidizer flux (lbm/sec/in.2 ) 1.51 1.07
Fuel regression rate (in./sec) 0.138 0.109
Distance burned (in.) 10.68 8.78
Grain length (in.) 1,189.6 976.1
Combustion port L/ D 41.5 37.2
Loaded fuel mass (lbm) 516,664 364,170
Fuel consumed (lbm) 362,577 348,584
Theoretical sliver fraction (%) 29.8 4.28
598 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
launch vehicle system requirements, such as total impulse and envelope con
straints, with available grain design options to arrive at an optimum motor
configuration. Total propellant and propellant contingency necessary to
accomplish a specific mission will depend upon such factors as residual fuel
and oxidizer allowances at motor cutoff, ascent trajectory throttling require
ments, which impact overall mixture ratio and oxidizer utilization, and addi
tional propellant if a !;;.u (vehicle velocity necessary to achieve mission
objectives) contingency reserve is required.
Using Table 15-2 to obtain c*, the initial vacuum-delivered specific impulse
for the circular port booster design may be calculated as
_ (CF)vc* _ (1.735)(0.95)(5912 ft/sec)_
I s,. - - lbm-f - 30 2 .8 7 sec
~ 32.174 t
2
lbf-sec
At the end of burn, the mixture ratio is determined from Eq. 15-16 to be 2.45.
The theortical characteristic velocity corresponding to the mixture ratio is 5815
ft/sec. Assuming the same combustion efficiency factor of 95%, the chamber
pressure, neglecting throat erosion, is determined to be
Pi = m~ = (9611 lbm/sec)(0.95)(5815 ft/sec)= _ lbf/in.2
646 5
go Ai (32.174 lbm-ft)(2552.5 in.2)
2
lbf-sec
Using the end-of-burn chamber pressure of 646.5 psia, the end-of-burn specific
impulse is calculated to be 299.3 sec.
The throat material erosion rate in a hybrid is generally significantly greater
than that of a solid propellant system and is a strong function of chamber
pressure and mixture ratio. Erosion of carbonaceous throat materials (carbon
cloth phenolic, graphite, etc.) is primarily governed by heterogeneous surface
chemical reactions involving the reaction of carbon with oxidizing species pres
ent in the flow of combustion gases such as 02, 0, H 20, OH, and CO2 to form
CO. Hybrid motor operation at oxygen-rich mixture ratios and high pressure
will result in very high throat erosion rates. Operation at fuel-rich mixture
ratios and pressures below 400 psi will result in very low throat erosion rates.
In general, the effect of throat erosion in ablative nozzles on overall motor
performance depends on initial throat diameter. For the booster design under
consideration, a 0.010-in./sec erosion rate acting only at the throat will reduce
the expansion ratio from 7.72 to 7.11 over the 120-sec burn time. Using the
end-of-burn mixture ratio of 2.45 corresponding to a ratio of specific heats of
1.137 (Table 15-2), an end-of-burn chamber pressure and vacuum thrust coef
ficient of 595.3 psia and 1.730, respectively, may be calculated. Therefore, if
throat erosion is accounted for, delivered specific impulse at the end of burn is
297.0 sec, a reduction of only 0.77% compared with the non-eroding throat
assumption. As initial throat diameter is reduced, the reduction in expansion
15.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 599
ratio due to throat erosion becomes greater, thereby resulting in greater per
formance losses.
Current practice for preliminary design of hybrid booster concepts is to
couple a fuel regression rate model, a grain design model, and booster compo
nent design models in an automated preliminary design procedure. Using
numerical optimization algorithms, such a computer model can pick the opti
mum booster design that maximizes selected optimization variables, such as
booster ideal velocity or total impulse, while minimizing booster propellant
and inert weight.
15.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY
The hybrid combustion process tends to produce somewhat rougher pressure
versus time characteristics than either liquid or solid rocket engines. However,
a well-designed hybrid will typically limit combustion roughness to approxi
mately 2 to 3% of mean chamber pressure. In any combustion device, pressure
fluctuations will tend to organize themselves around the natural acoustic fre
quencies of the combustion chamber or oxidizer feed system. While significant
combustion pressure oscillations at chamber natural-mode acoustic frequencies
have been observed in numerous hybrid motor tests, such oscillations have not
proved to be an insurmountable design problem. When pressure oscillations
have occurred in hybrid motors, they have been observed to grow to a limiting
amplitude which is dependent on such factors as oxidizer feed system and
injector characteristics, fuel grain geometric characteristics, mean chamber
pressure level, and oxidizer mass velocity. Unbounded growth of pressure
oscillations, such as may occur in solid and liquid rocket motors, has not
been observed in hybrid motors.
Hybrid motors have exhibited two basic types of instabilities in static test
environments: oxidizer feed system-induced instability (non-acoustic), and
flame holding instability (acoustic). Oxidizer feed system instability is essen
tially a chugging type as described in Chapter 9 and arises when the feed system
is sufficiently "soft." In cryogenic systems, this implies a high level of compres
sibility from sources such as vapor cavities or two-phase flow in feed lines
combined with insufficient isolation from motor combustion processes.
Figure 15-1 Oa illustrates feed system induced instability in a 24-in. diameter
hybrid motor operated at a LOX flow rate of 20 lbm/sec with HTPB fuel. The
instability is manifested by high-amplitude, periodic oscillations well below the
first longitudinal (1-L) acoustic mode of the combustor. In this example the
oscillation frequency is 7.5 Hz whereas the 1-L mode frequency is approxi
mately 60 Hz. Stiffening the feed/injection system can eliminate the oscillation.
This is accomplished by increasing the injector pressure drop (thus making
propagation of motor pressure disturbances upstream through the feed system
more difficult) and eliminating sources of compressibility in the feed system.
Chugging-type instabilities in hybrid motors have proven amenable to analysis
600 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
600
500
!
400
I!!
: ti, 300
I!!
Q.
200 {\Ji
100
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Time From Motor Start (sec)
(a)
1,000
800
ii
.S,
e.. 600
::,
400
200
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Time (sec)
(b)
FIGURE 15-10. (a) Periodic, large-amplitude, low-frequency combustion pressure
oscillations are an example of oxidizer feed system induced "chug" type combustion
instability in a 24-in. diameter LOX/HTBP motor. (b) An example of stable combus
tion in a 24-in. diameter LOX/HTPB motor, exhibiting an overall combustion rough
ness level of 1.3%.
in terms of prediction and prevention (Ref. 15-17). For purposes of compar
ison, Fig. 15-lOb shows a pressure-time trace from the same 24-in. diameter
hybrid motor exhibiting stable combustion while being operated at a LOX flow
rate of 40 lbm/sec at a maximum chamber pressure of 900 psi.
Flame-holding instability relevant to hybrid motors was first observed dur
ing the development of solid fuel ramjets (Ref. 15-18). A solid fuel ramjet is
essentially a hybrid motor operating on the oxygen available in ram air. Flame
holding instabilities in hybrids are typically manifested at acoustic frequencies
15.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 601
and appear in longitudinal modes. No acoustic instabilities in hybrid motors
have been observed in higher frequency tangential or radial modes such as in
solid rocket motors or liquid engines. Flame-holding instabilities arise due to
inadequate flame stabilization in the boundary layer (Ref. 15-19) and are not
associated with feed system flow perturbations. Figure 15-11 a illustrates flame
holding instability in an 11-in. diameter hybrid motor operated with gaseous
oxygen (GOX) oxidizer and HTPB fuel, using an injector producing a conical
flow field. In this test, oxygen flow was initiated through the motor at a pres
sure of 90 psi for two seconds prior to motor ignition. The motor was ignited
using a hydrogen torch that continued to operate for approximately one sec
ond following motor ignition. During the first second of motor operation, the
hydrogen igniter flame stabilizes the motor. When the igniter flame is extin
guished, the motor becomes unstable. Figure 15-1 lb illustrates operation of
the same 11-in. diameter motor in which the flame-holding instability has been
suppressed without the use of a hydrogen flame. In this case stable combustion
was achieved by changing the flow field within the motor, using an injector
producing an axial flow field. Figure 15-12 shows the result of decomposing
the pressure versus time signal for the unstable example of Fig. 15-1 la into its
frequency components via fast Fourier transform techniques. The 1-L acoustic
oscillation mode is clearly visible at approximately 150 Hz.
It is apparent that flame-holding instability can be eliminated by several
means, all of which act to stabilize combustion in the boundary layer. The
first method is to use a pilot flame derived from injection of a combustible fluid
such as hydrogen or propane to provide sufficient oxidizer preheating in the
leading edge region of the boundary layer flame zone. With this technique,
motor stability characteristics are relatively insensitive to the nature of the
injector flow field. In the previous example, the hydrogen torch igniter acted
as a pilot during its period of operation. A second method involves changing
the injector flow field to ensure that a sufficiently large hot gas recirculation
zone is present at the head end of the fuel grain. Such a zone can be created by
forcing the upstream flow over a rearward-facing step or by strong axial injec
tion of oxidizer (see Fig. 15-13). Axial injection in the correct configuration
produces a strong counter-flowing hot gas recirculation zone, similar to that of
a rearward-facing step, at the heac'. end of the diffusion flame (conical injection
produces a much smaller and usually ineffective recirculation zone). These
techniques produce a flow field result very similar to that produced by bluff
body flame stabilizers used in jet engine afterburners and solid fuel ramjets to
prevent flame blowoff. The recirculation zone acts to entrain hot gas from the
core flow, which provides sufficient oxidizer preheating for the leading edge of
the boundary layer diffusion flame to stabilize combustion.
Comparison of the average pressure levels in Figs. 15-11 a and 15-11 b illus
trates an interesting phenomenon. For the same motor operating conditions
(oxidizer flow rate, grain geometry and composition, and throat diameter) the
average pressure in the unstable motor is significantly greater than that in the
stable motor. This same phenomenon has been noted in solid propellant
602 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
soar--------------------------------.
700
600
Cl
"iii 500
S,
! 400
:::s
VI
VI
! 300
C.
200
100
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Time (sec)
(a)
soor---------------------"""""-------
450~--------""-------, _________ ,_,
400
Cl 350
0
S, 300
e
250
I
a. 150~---- , _____ , ______________ ,._ ____ _
100
50 1-------------+
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
lime (sec)
(b)
FIGURE 15-11. (a) An example of large-amplitude, high-frequency combustion pres
sure oscillations due to flame-holding instability in an 11-in. diameter GOX/HTPB
motor. Instability during the initial one second of burn has been suppressed by the
use of a pilot flame. (b) Suppression of flame-holding instability in an 11-in. diameter
GOX/HTPB motor by means of strong axial injection of oxidizer.
15.4. COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 603
70
60
-
50
·0
.e,
... 40
Cl)
::i
(/)
(/) 30
aC:l)
20
10
50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Frequency (Hz)
FIGURE 15-12. A frequency-versus-amplitude plot at successive time intervals for an
I I-in. diameter GOX/HTPB motor test shows pressure oscillations in the motor 1-L
acoustic mode at 150 Hz due to flame-holding instability.
Fuel grain
Hot gas re-circulation zone
(a)
Fuel grain
Diminished or non-existent hot gas
re-circulation zone
(b)
FIGURE 15-13. (a) Axial injection of oxidizer results in a strong hot gas flow recircu
lation zone at the fuel grain leading edge, producing stable combustion. (b) Conical
injection of oxidizer can produce a weak or nonexistent hot gas flow recirculation zone
at the fuel grain leading edge, resulting in unstable combustion.
604 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
motors and the results from intensification of heat transfer to the fuel surface
due to the gas velocity at the fuel surface oscillating at high frequency. The high
heating rate results in the vaporization of more fuel than would otherwise
occur in equilibrium conditions, thus producing a higher average chamber
pressure.
Despite recent advances in understanding causes of and solutions for com
bustion instability in hybrid motors, development of a comprehensive, predic
tive theory of combustion stability remains one of the major challenges m
hybrid technology development.
SYMBOLS (includes symbols used in Appendices 4 and 5)
a burning or regression rate coefficient variable
(units of a depend on value of oxidizer
flux exponent)
A particle cloud attenuation coefficient m2(ft2)/particle
AP combustion port area m2 (in.2 )
As fuel grain surface area m2 (in.2 )
A1 nozzle throat area m2 (ft2 )
C* characteristic velocity m/sec (ft/sec)
C particle cloud concentration particles/unit volume
cf skin friction coefficient (blowing) dimensionless
Clo skin friction coefficient (no blowing) dimensionless
CF,. vacuum thrust coefficient dimensionless
ch Stanton number dimensionless
Cp heat capacity J/kg-K (Btu/lbm-R)
db fuel grain burn distance m (in.)
Dh hydraulic diameter (4 Ap/ P) m (in.)
DP combustion port diameter m (in.)
D1 nozzle throat diameter m (in.)
Fv vacuum thrust N (!bf)
G mass velocity kg/m2-sec (lbm/ft2-sec)
Go oxidizer mass velocity kg/m2- sec (lbm/ft2 -sec)
go conversion factor~acceleration of m/sec2 (lbm-ft/lbf/sec2 )
gravity
h convective heat transfer coefficient J /m2-sec/K (Btu/ft2-sec/R)
hv heat of gasification J /kg (Btu/lbm)
/:;.h flame zone~fuel surface enthalpy J/kg (Btu/lbm)
difference
Hf heat of formation J/kg-mol (kcal/mo!)
Is specific impulse sec
k specific heat ratio dimensionless
L combustion port length m (in.)
m
propellant flow rate kg/sec (lbm/sec)
SYMBOLS (INCLUDES SYMBOLS USED IN APPENDICES 4 AND 5) 605
m1 fuel flow rate kg/sec (lbm/sec)
mo oxidizer flow rate kg/sec (lbm/sec)
n,m, l burning or regression rate pressure dimensionless
exponent
p combustion port perimeter m (in.)
PI chamber pressure MPa (lbf/in.2 )
Pr Prandtl number dimensionless
QC heat input to fuel surface due to J/ m2 -sec (Btu/ft2- sec)
convection
Qrad heat input to fuel surface due to J/m2-sec (Btu/ft2-sec)
radiation
Qs total heat input to fuel surface J/ m2 -sec (Btu/ft2 -sec)
R combustion port radius m (in.)
Ri initial combustion port radius m (in.)
Re Reynolds number dimensionless
r
fuel regression rate mm/sec (in./sec)
r oxidizer to fuel mixture ratio dimensionless
T temperature K (F)
Ue gas free stream velocity in axial m/sec (ft/sec)
direction
V gas velocity normal to fuel surface m/sec (ft/sec)
Vr chamber volume m3 (in.3 )
X axial distance from leading edge of m (in.)
fuel grain
y length coordinate normal to fuel m (in.)
surface
z radiation path length m (in.)
Greek Letters
a fuel surface absorptivity dimensionless
boundary layer blowing coefficient dimensionless
emissivity of particle-laden gas dimensionless
gas conductivity J/ m2 -sec/K (Btu/ft-sec-R)
gas viscosity N-sec/m2 (lbf-sec/ft2 )
combustion chamber gas density kg/m3 (lbm/in.3 )
free stream gas density kg/m3 (lbm/in.3 )
fuel density kg/m3 (lbm/in.3 )
Stefan-Boltzmann constant J/ m2-sec/K4 (Btu/ft2-sec/R4 )
Subscripts
e boundary layer edge conditions
f fuel
initial conditions
606 HYBRID PROPELLANT ROCKETS
o oxidizer
s surface conditions
X axial distance from leading edge m (in.)
of fuel grain
ref reference conditions
REFERENCES
15-1. D. Altman, "Hybrid Rocket Development History," AIAA Paper 91-2515, June
1991.
15-2. F. B. Mead and B. R. Bornhorst, "Certification Tests of a Hybrid Propulsion
System for the Sandpiper Target Missile," AFRPL-TR-69-73, June 1969.
15-3. P. D. Laforce et al., "Technological Development of a Throttling Hybrid
Propulsion System," UTC 2215-FR, January 1967.
15-4. H. R. Lips, "Experimental Investigation of Hybrid Rocket Engines Using
Highly Aluminized Fuels," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 14, No. 9,
September 1977, pp. 539-545.
15-5. J. S. McFarlane et al., "Design and Testing of AMROC's 250,000 !bf Thrust
Hybrid Motor," AIAA Paper 93-2551, June 1993.
15-6. T. A. Boardman, T. M. Abel, S. E. Claflin, and C. W. Shaeffer, "Design and
Test Planning for a 250-klbf-Thrust Hybrid Rocket Motor under the Hybrid
Propulsion Demonstration Program," AIAA Paper 97-2804, July 1997.
15-7. S. R. Jain and G. Rajencran, "Performance Parameters of some New Hybrid
Hypergols," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 1, No. 6, November
December 1985, pp. 500-501.
15-8. U. C. Durgapal and A. K. Chakrabarti, "Regression Rate Studies of Aniline
Formaldehyde-Red Fuming Nitric Acid Hybrid System," Journal of Spacecraft
and Rockets, Vol. 2, No. 6, 1974, pp. 447-448.
15-9. G. A. Marxman, "Combustion in the Turbulent Boundary Layer on a
Vaporizing Surface," Tenth Symposium on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, 1965, pp. 1337-1349.
15-10. P.A. 0. G. Korting, H.F. R. Schoyer, and Y. M. Timnat, "Advanced Hybrid
Rocket Motor Experiments," Acta Astronautica, Vol. 15, No. 2, 1987, pp. 97-
104.
15-11. W. Waidmann, "Thrust Modulation in Hybrid Rocket Engines," Journal of
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 4, No. 5, September-October 1988, pp. 421-427.
15-12. M. J. Chiaverini et al., "Thermal Pyrolysis and Combustion of HTPB-based
Solid Fuels for Hybrid Rocket Motor Applications," AIAA Paper 96-2845, July
1996.
15-13. L. D. Smoot and C. F. Price, "Regression Rates of Metalized Hybrid Fuel
Systems," AIAA Journal, Vol. 4, No. 5, September 1965, pp. 910-915.
15-14. Laboratory data obtained in 2-in. diameter test motors, Thiokol Corporation,
1989.
REFERENCES 607
15-15. T. A. Boardman, R. L. Carpenter, et al., "Development and Testing of I I- and
24-inch Hybrid Motors under the Joint Government/Industry IR&D Program,"
A/AA Paper 93-2552, June 1993.
15-16. P. Estey, D. Altman, and J. McFarlane, "An Evaluation of Scaling Effects for
Hybrid Rocket Motors," A/AA Paper 91-2517, June 1991.
15-17. T. A. Boardman, K. K. Hawkins, S. R. Wassom, and S. E. Claflin, "Non
Acoustic Feed System Coupled Combustion Instability in Hybrid Rocket
Motors," Hybrid Rocket Technical Committee Combustion Stability
Workshop, 31st AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and
Exhibit, July I 995.
15-18. B. L. Iwanciow, A. L. Holzman, and R. Dunlap, "Combustion Stabilization in a
Solid Fuel Ramjet," 10th JANNAF Combustion Meeting, 1973.
15-19. T. A. Boardman, D. H. Brinton, R. L. Carpenter, and T. F. Zoladz, "An
Experimental Investigation of Pressure Oscillations and their Suppression in
Suscale Hybrid Rocket Motors," A/AA Paper 95-2689, July 1995.
CHAPTER 16
THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
In addition to providing a propulsive force to a flying vehicle, a rocket propul
sion system can provide moments to rotate the flying vehicle and thus provide
control of the vehicle's attitude and flight path. By controlling the direction of
the thrust vectors through the mechanisms described later in the chapter, it is
possible to control a vehicle's pitch, yaw, and roll motions.
All chemical propulsion systems can be provided with one of several types of
thrust vector control (TVC) mechanisms. Some of these apply either to solid,
hybrid, or to liquid propellant rocket propulsion systems, but most are specific
to only one of these propulsion categories. We will describe two types of thrust
vector control concept: (1) for an engine or a motor with a single nozzle; and
(2) for those that have two or more nozzles.
Thrust vector control is effective only while the propulsion system is oper
ating and creating an exhaust jet. For the flight period, when a rocket propul
sion system is not firing and therefore its TVC is inoperative, a separate
mechanism needs to be provided to the flying vehicle for achieving control
over its attitude or flight path.
Aerodynamic fins (fixed and movable) continue to be very effective for
controlling vehicle flight within the earth's atmosphere, and almost all weather
rockets, antiaircraft missiles, and air-to-surface missiles use them. Even though
aerodynamic control surfaces provide some additional drag, their effectiveness
in terms of vehicle weight, turning moment, and actuating power consumption
is difficult to surpass with any other flight control method. Vehicle flight con
trol can also be achieved by a separate attitude control propulsion system as
described in Sections 4.6, 6.8, and 11.3. Here six or more small liquid propel
lant thrusters (with a separate feed system and a separate control) provide
608
16.1. TVC MECHANISMS WITH A SINGLE NOZZLE 609
small moments to the vehicle in flight during, before, or after the operation of
the main rocket propulsion system.
The reasons for TVC are: (1) to willfully change a flight path or trajectory
(e .g., changing the direction of the flight path of a target-seeking missile); (2) to
rotate the vehicle or change its attitude during powered flight; (3) to correct for
deviation from the intended trajectory or the attitude during powered flight; or
(4) to correct for thrust misalignment of a fixed nozzle in the main propulsion
system during its operation, when the main thrust vector misses the vehicle's
center of gravity.
Pitch moments are those that raise or lower the nose of a vehicle; yaw
moments turn the nose sideways; and roll moments are applied about the
main axis of the flying vehicle (Fig. 16-1). Usually, the thrust vector of the
main rocket nozzle is in the direction of the vehicle axis and goes through the
vehicle's center of gravity. Thus it is possible to obtain pitch and yaw control
moments by the simple deflection of the main rocket thrust vector; however,
roll control usually requires the use of two or more rotary vanes or two or more
separately hinged propulsion system nozzles. Figure 16-2 explains the pitch
moment obtained by a hinged thrust chamber or nozzle. The side force and the
pitch moment vary as the sine of the effective angle of thrust vector deflection.
16.1. TVC MECHANISMS WITH A SINGLE NOZZLE
Many different mechanisms have been used successfully. Several are illustrated
in Refs. 16-1 and 16-2. They can be classified into four categories:
1. Mechanical deflection of the nozzle or thrust chamber.
2. Insertion of heat-resistant movable bodies into the exhaust jet; these
experience aerodynamic forces and cause a deflection of a part of the
exhaust gas flow.
3. Injection of fluid into the side of the diverging nozzle section, causing an
asymmetrical distortion of the supersonic exhaust flow.
u u
/
+Roll
-Pitch
FIGURE 16-1. Moments applied to a flying vehicle.
610 THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
Vehicle axis ,,, /
/
Thrust
force
vector, F
/
~
Deflection angle, {)
e.
FIGURE 16-2. The pitch moment applied to the vehicle is FL sin
4. Separate thrust-producing devices that are not part of the main flow
through the nozzle.
Each category is described briefly below and in Table 16--1, where the four
categories are separated by horizontal lines. Figure 16-3 illustrates several
TVC mechanisms. All of the TVC schemes shown here have been used in
production vehicles.
In the hinge or gimbal scheme (a hinge permits rotation about one axis only,
whereas a gimbal is essentially a universal joint), the whole engine is pivoted on
a bearing and thus the thrust vector is rotated. For small angles this scheme has
negligible losses in specific impulse and is used in many vehicles. It requires a
flexible set of propellant piping (bellows) to allow the propellant to flow from
the tanks of the vehicle to the movable engine. The Space Shuttle (Fig. 1-13)
has two gimballed orbit maneuver engines, and three gimballed main engines.
Figures 6--1, 6-3, and 8-19 show gimballed engines. Some Soviet launch vehi
cles use multiple thrusters and hinges (Fig. 10-10 shows 4 hinges), while many
U.S. vehicles use gimbals.
Jet vanes are pairs of heat-resistant, aerodynamic wing-shaped surfaces sub
merged in the exhaust jet of a fixed rocket nozzle. They were first used about 55
years ago. They cause extra drag (2 to 5% less / drag increases with larger
5;
vane deflections) and erosion of the vane material. Graphite jet vanes were used
in the German V-2 missile in World War II and in the Scud missiles fired by
Iraq in 1991. The advantage of having roll control with a single nozzle often
outweighs the performance penalties.
Small auxiliary thrust chambers were used in the Thor and early version of
Atlas missiles. They provide roll control while the principal rocket engine
operates. They are fed from the same feed system as the main rocket engine.
This scheme is still used on some Russian booster rocket vehicles.
The injection of secondary fluid through the wall of the nozzle into the main
gas stream has the effect of forming oblique shocks in the nozzle diverging
16.1. TVC MECHANISMS WITH A SINGLE NOZZLE 611
TABLE 16-1. Thrust Vector Control Mechanisms
Type L/Sa Advantages Disadvantages
Gimbal or hinge L Simple, proven technology; low Requires flexible piping; high
torques, low power; ±12° inertia; large actuators for high
duration limited only by slew rate
propellant supply; very
small thrust loss
Movable nozzle s Proven technology; no sliding, High actuation forces; high torque
(flexible moving seals; predictable at low temperatures; variable
bearing) actuation power; up to ±12° actuation force
Movable nozzle s Proven technology; no thrust Sliding, moving hot gas spherical
(rotary ball loss if entire nozzle is moved; seal; highly variable actuation
with gas seal) ±20° possible power; limited duration; needs
continuous load to maintain seal
Jet vanes L/S Proven technology; low actuation Thrust loss of 0.5 to 3%; erosion
power; high slew rate; roll of jet vanes; limited duration;
control with single nozzle; ±9° extends missile length
Jet tabs s Proven technology; high slew Erosion of tabs; thrust loss, but
rate; low actuation power; only when tab is in the jet;
compact package limhed duration
Jetavator s Proven on Polaris missile; low Erosion and thrust loss; induces
actuation power; can be vehicle base hot gas
lightweight recirculation; limited duration
Liquid-side S/L Proven technology; specific Toxic liquids are needed for high
injection impulse of injectant nearly performance; often difficult
offsets weight penalty; high packaging for tanks and feed
slew rate; easy to adapt to system; sometimes requires
various motors; can check out excessive maintenance; potential
before flight; components are spills and toxic fumes with some
reusable; duration limited by propellants; limited to low vector
liquid supply; ±6° angle applications
Hot-gas-side S/L Lightweight; low actuation power; Multiple hot sliding contacts and
injection high slew rate; low volume/ seals in hot gas valve; hot piping
compact; low performance loss expansion; limited duration;
requires special hot gas valves;
technology is not yet proven
Hinged auxiliary L Proven technology; feed from Additional components and
thrust main turbopump; low complexity; moments applied to
chambers for performance loss; compact; vehicle are small; not used for 15
high thrust low actuation power; no hot years in USA
engine moving surfaces; unlimited
duration
Turbine exhaust L Swivel joint is at low pressure; Limited side forces; moderately hot
gas swivel for low performance loss; swivel joint; used for roll control
large engine lightweight; proven technology only
aL, used with liquid propellant engines; S, used with solid propellant motors.
612 THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
Flexible Flexible
Gimbal or laminated nozzle Jet vanes
hinge bearing joint
--------
Universal joint Nozzle is held by ring Sealed rotary ball Four rotating heat
suspension for thrust of alternate layers of joint resistant aerodynamic
chamber molded elastomer and vanes In jet
spherically formed
sheet metal
s s us
Small control
Jetavator Jet tabs Side injection thrust
chambers
Rotating airfoil Four paddles that Secondary fluid Two or more
shaped collar, gim rotate in and out of injection on one side gimballed auxiliary
balled near nozzle the hot gas flow at a time thrust chambers
exit
s s s
FIGURE 16-3. Simple schematic diagrams of eight different TVC mechanisms.
Actuators and structural details are not shown. The letter L means it is used with liquid
propellant rocket engines and S means it is used with solid propellant motors.
section, thus causing an unsymmetrical distribution of the main gas flow, which
produces a side force. The secondary fluid can be stored liquid or gas from a
separate hot gas generator (the gas would then still be sufficiently cool to be
piped), a direct bleed from the chamber, or the injection of a catalyzed mono
propellant. When the deflections are small, this is a low-loss scheme, but for
16.1. TVC MECHANISMS WITH A SINGLE NOZZLE 613
large moments (large side forces) the amount of secondary fluid becomes
excessive. This scheme has found application in a few large solid propellant
rockets, such as Titan IIIC and one version of Minuteman.
Of all the mechanical deflection types, the movable nozzles are the most
efficient. They do not significantly reduce the thrust or the specific impulse
and are weight-competitive with the other mechanical types. The flexible noz
zle, shown in Figs. 16-3 and 16--4, is a common type of TVC used with solid
propellant motors. The molded, multilayer bearing pack acts as a seal, a load
transfer bearing, and a viscoelastic flexure. It uses the deformation of a stacked
set of doubly curved elastomeric (rubbery) layers between spherical metal
sheets to carry the loads and allow an angular deflection of the nozzle axis.
The flexible seal nozzle has been used in launch vehicles and large strategic
missiles, where the environmental temperature extremes are modest. At low
temperature the elastomer becomes stiff and the actuation torques increase
substantially, requiring a much larger actuation system. Figure 16-5 describes
a different type of flexible nozzle. It uses a movable joint with a toroidal
hydraulic bag to transfer loads. There are double seals to prevent leaks of
hot gas and various insulators to keep the structure below 200°F or 93°C.
Two of the gimbals will now be described in more detail. Figure 16-6 shows
the gimbal bearing assembly of the Space Shuttle main engine. It supports the
Downstream pivot point Upstream pivot point
FIGURE 16-4. Two methods of using flexible nozzle bearings with different locations
for the center of rotation. The bearing support ring is made of metal or plastic sheet
shims formed into rings with spherical contours (white) bonded together by layers of
molded elastomer or rubber (black stripes). Although only five elastomeric layers are
shown for clarity, many flexible bearings have IO to 20 layers. (Copied with permission
from Ref. 16-1.)
614 THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
Midcylinder
Ethylene-propylene diene monomer (EPDM) insulation
~ 91.8
I diam.
51. 760
diameter
• =
63.8
0.50 clearance Igniter I
(shielded mild nozzles (3) Pivot
detonating cord) Propellant for pyrogen igniter point
Through-bulkhead initiators (2)
---~126--------·
Silica phenolic Steel pin
Adhesive
/.
Aluminum
Carbon cloth/
Titanium
Teflon cover
ring
Graphite felt
Molded
annular bag,
Kevlar-neoprene
with steel cable
Titanium Thread with adhesive
Silica phenolic
Carbon-carbon 3-D Fluid filled annular bearing cavity
FIGURE 16--5. Simplified cross section of an upper-stage solid propellant rocket motor
(IUS) using an insulated carbon-fiber/carbon-matrix nozzle, an insulated Kevlar fila
ment-wound case, a pyrogen igniter, forward and aft stress-relieving boots, a fluid-filled
4
bearing, and an elastomeric seal assembly in the nozzle to allow 4 ° of thrust vector
deflection. This motor has a loaded weight of 22,874 !bf, a propellant with hydroxyl
terminated polybutadiene binder, a weight of 21,400 !bf, a burnout weight of 1360 !bf, a
motor mass fraction of 0.94 I, a nozzle throat diameter of 6.48 in., and a nozzle exit area
ratio of 63.8. The motor burns 146 sec at an average pressure of 651 psi (886 psi
maximum) and an average thrust of 44,000 !bf (60,200 !bf maximum), with an effective
altitude specific impulse of 295 sec. Top drawing is cross section of motor; bottom
drawing is enlarged cross section of nozzle package assembly. The motor is an enlarged
version of Orbus-6 described in Fig. I 1-3. (From C. A. Chase, "IUS Solid Motor
Overview," JANNAF Conference, Monterey, Calif, 1983; courtesy of United
Technologies Corp./Chemical Systems.)
16.1. TVC MECHANISMS WITH A SINGLE NOZZLE 615
weight of the engine and transmits the thrust force. It is a ball-and-socket
universal joint with contact and intermeshing spherical (concave and convex)
surfaces. Sliding occurs on these surfaces as the gimbal assembly is rotated.
When assembling the engine to the vehicle, some offset bushings are used to
align the thrust vector. Some of the design features and performance require
ments of this gimbal are listed in Table 16--2. The maximum angular motion is
actually larger than the deflection angle during operation so as to allow for
various tolerances and alignments. The actual deflections, alignment toler
ances, friction coefficients, angular speeds, and accelerations during operation
are usually much smaller than the maximum values listed in the table.
Table 16--3 and Ref. 16--3 give the design requirements for the actuator
system for the TVC for a flexible bearing in the IUS solid rocket motor nozzle.
This system is shown in Figs. 11-3 and 16--5 and in Table 11-3. One version of
this nozzle can deflect 4° maximum plus 0.5° for margin and another is rated at
7.5°. It has two electrically redundant electromechanical actuators using ball
screws, two potentiometers for position indication, and one controller that
provides both the power drive and the signal control electronics for each
actuator. A variable-frequency, pulse-width-modulated (PWM) electric
motor drive is used to allow small size and low weight for the power and forces
TABLE 16-2. Characteristics and Performance Requirements of the Gimbal Bearing
Assembly of the Space Shuttle Main Engine
Engine weight to be supported (!bf) Approx. 7000
Thrust to be transmitted, (!bf) 512,000
Gimbal asembly weight (!bf) 105
Material is titanium alloy 6Al-6V-2Sn
Dimensions (approximate) (in.) II dia. x 14
Angular motion (deg)
Operational requirement (max.) ±10.5
Snubbing allowance in actuators 0.5
Angular alignment 0.5
Gimbal attach point tolerance 0.7
Overtravel vector adjustment 0.1
Maximum angular capability ±12.5
Angular acceleration (max.) (rad/sec2 ) 30
Angular velocity (max.) (deg/sec) 20
Angular velocity (min.) (deg/sec) 10
Lateral adjustment (in.) ±0.25
Gimbal duty cycle about each axis
Number of operational cycles to I 0.5° 200
Nonoperational cycles to 10.5° 1400
Coefficient of friction (over a temperature range of 88 to 340 K) 0.01---0.2
Source: Courtesy of Rocketdyne, a Division of Rockwell International.
616 THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
TABLE 16-3. Design Requirements for TVC Actuation System of an IUS Solid
Rocket Motor
Item Requirement
Performance parameter
Input power 31 A/axis maximum at 24 to
32 V de; > 900 W (peak)
Stroke 10.2 cm (4.140 in.) minimum
Stall force 1.9 kN (430 !bf) minimum
Accuracy ±1.6 mm (±0.063 in.) maximum
Frequency response > 3.2 Hz at 100° phase lag
No load speed 8.13 cm/sec (3.2 in./sec)
mm1mum
Stiffness 28.9 kN/cm (16,600 !bf/in.)
mm1mum
Backlash ±0.18 mm (0.007 in.) maximum
Reliability > 0.99988 redundant drive train,
> 0.999972 single thread element
Weight
Controller 5.9 kg (13 !bf) maximum, each
Actuator 7.04 kg (15.5 !bf) maximum, each
Potentiometer 1.23 kg (2. 7 !bf) maximum, each
System 22.44 kg (49.4 !bf) maximum
Source: Reproduced from Ref. 16-3 with permission of United Technologies Corp./Chemical
Systems.
Vehicle attach flange
Alignment
Block bushings
Engine attach flange
FIGURE 16--6. Gimbal bearing of the Space Shuttle main engine. (Courtesy of the
Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion & Power.)
16.1. TVC MECHANISMS WITH A SINGLE NOZZLE 617
involved. Also, it has a pair of locking mechanisms that will lock the nozzle in a
fixed pitch-and-yaw position as a fail-safe device.
The alignment of the thrust vector is a necessary activity during assembly.
The thrust vector in the neutral position (no deflection or, in many vehicles, the
thrust axis coincides with the vehicle axis) should usually go through the center
of gravity of the vehicle. The TVC mechanism has to allow for alignment or
adjustments in angle as well as position of the TVC center point with the
intended vehicle axis. The geometric centerline of the diverging section of the
nozzle is generally considered to be the thrust direction. One alignment provi
sion is shown in Fig. 16-6. An alignment accuracy of one-quarter of a degree
and an axis offset of 0.020 in. have been achieved with good measuring fixtures
for small-sized nozzles.
The jet tab TVC system has low torque, and is simple for flight vehicles with
low-area-ratio nozzles. Its thrust loss is high when tabs are rotated at full angle
into the jet, but is zero when the tabs are in their neutral position outside of the
jet. On most flights the time-averaged position of the tab is a very small angle
and the average thrust loss is small. Jet tabs can form a very compact mecha
nism and have been used successfully on tactical missiles. An example is the jet
tab assembly for the booster rocket motor of the Tomahawk cruise missile,
shown in Fig. 16-7. Four tabs, independently actuated, are rotated in and out
of the motor's exhaust jet during the 15 sec duration of rocket operation. A tab
that blocks 16% of the nozzle exit area is equivalent to a thrust vector angle
deflection of 9°. The maximum angle is 12° and the slew rate is fast (100°/sec).
The vanes are driven by four linear small push-pull hydraulic actuators with
two servo valves and an automatic integral controller. The power is supplied by
compressed nitrogen stored at 3000 psi. An explosive valve releases the gas to
pressurize an oil accumulator in a blowdown mode. The vanes are made of
tungsten to minimize the erosion from the solid particles in the exhaust gas.
The jetavator was used on submarine-launched missiles. The thrust loss is
roughly proportional to the vector angle. This mechanism is shown in Fig.
16-3 and mentioned in Table 16-1.
The concept of TVC by secondary fluid injection into the exhaust stream
dates back to 1949 and can be credited to A. E. Wetherbee, Jr. (U.S. Patent
2,943,821). Application of liquid injection thrust vector control (LITVC) to
production vehicles began in the early 1960s. Both inert (water) and reactive
fluids (such as hydrazine or nitrogen tetroxide) have been used. Although side
injection of reactive liquids is still used on some of the older vehicles, it requires
a pressurized propellant tank and a feed system. A high-density injection liquid
is preferred because its tank will be relatively small and its pressurization will
require less mass. Because other schemes have better preformance, liquid injec
tion TVC will probably not be selected for new applications.
Hot gas injection (HGITVC) of solid rocket propellant or liquid propellant
combustion products is inherently attractive from a performance and packa
ging viewpoint. In the past there has not been a production application of
HGITVC because of erosion of materials in hot gas valves. However, two
618 THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
Electro
explosive start
valve
Rocket motor
nozzle (seen
from rear)
Electro cable
connector Coated tungsten
rotary jet tab (4)
Push-pull
linear
hydraulic
actuator (4)
Acceptance test
fixture
FIGURE 16-7. Two views of the jet tab assembly, packaged in a doughnut shape
volume around the nozzle of the Tomahawk cruise missile's solid propellant booster
rocket motor. Hydraulic actuators rotate the tabs in and out of the nozzle exhaust jet
and are located just beyond the nozzle exit. (Courtesy of Space and Electronics Group,
TRW, Inc.)
factors now make hot-gas-side injection feasible: first, hot gas valves can be
made with the newer carbon---carbon structural parts and modern insulators. A
hot gas system with a limited duration hot gas carbon valve is described in Ref.
16-4. Also, advances in metallurgy have made possible the development of hot
valves made of rhenium alloy, a high-temperature metal suitable for hot gas
valve applications. The second factor is the development of solid propellants
that are less aggressive (less AP, Al 20 3, and/or fewer oxidizing gas ingredients)
and reduce the erosion in nozzles and valves; this helps the hot gas valves and
insulated hot gas plumbing to better survive for limited durations but often at
the expense of propulsion system performance. Experimental hot gas systems
have had difficulties with thermal distortions and in keeping key components
cool enough to prevent failure.
With either liquid or solid propellants, the hot gas can be bled off the main
combustion chamber or generated in a separate gas generator. The hot gas
valves can be used to (I) control side injection of hot gas into a large nozzle, or
(2) control a pulsing flow through a series of small fixed nozzles similar to small
attitude control thrusters described in Chapters 4, 6, and 11. In liquid propel
lant engines it is feasible to tap or withdraw gas from the thrust chamber at a
location where there is an intentional fuel-rich mixture ratio; the gas tempera-
16.1. TVC MECHANISMS WITH A SINGLE NOZZLE 619
ture would then be low enough (about l l00°C or 2000°F) so that uncooled
metal hardware can be used for HGITVC valves and piping.
The total side force resulting from secondary injection of a fluid into the
main stream of the supersonic nozzle can be expressed as two force compo
nents: (1) the force associated with the momentum of the injectant; and (2) the
pressure unbalance acting over areas of the internal nozzle wall. The second
term results from the unbalanced wall pressures within the nozzle caused by
shock formation, boundary layer separation, difference between injectant and
undisturbed nozzle stream pressures, and primary-secondary combustion reac
tions (for chemically active injectants). The strength of the shock pattern and
the pressure unbalance created between opposite walls in the nozzle is depen
dent on many variables, including the properties of the injectant and whether it
is liquid or gas. In the case of injecting a reactive fluid, the combustion occur
ring downstream of the injection port(s) usually produces a larger pressure
unbalance effect than is obtained by liquid vaporization only. However, benefit
from combustion is dependent on a chemical reaction rate high enough to keep
the reaction zone close to the injection port. The TVC performance that is
typical of inert and reactive liquids and hot gas (solid propellant combustion
products) is indicated in Fig. 16-8. This plot of force ratios to mass flow ratios
is a parametric representation commonly used in performance comparisons.
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
-( cl) . -,t :, , 0.06
'o-.c'-:
:( 2l ) -~- 0.05
(/)<!.
0.04
0.03
0.02
O.Dl
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20
lnjectant flow
Pnmaryflow
FIGURE 1~8. Typical performance regions of various side injectants in TVC nozzles.
620 THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
16.2. TVC WITH MULTIPLE THRUST CHAMBERS OR NOZZLES
All the various concepts shown in Fig. 16-3 can provide pitch and yaw
moments to a vehicle. Roll control can be obtained only if there are at least
two separate vectorable nozzles, four fixed pulsing or throttled flow nozzles, or
two jet vanes submerged in the exhaust gas from a single nozzle.
Several concepts have been developed and flown that use two or more rocket
engines or a single engine or motor with two or more actuated nozzles. Two fully
gimballed thrust chambers or motor nozzles can provide roll control with very
slight differential angular deflections. For pitch and yaw control, the deflection
would be larger, be of the same angle and direction for both nozzles, and the
deflection magnitude would be the same for both nozzles. This can also be
achieved with four hinged (see Figure 10--10) or gimballed nozzles. Figure 16-9
shows the rocket motor of an early version of the Minuteman missile booster
(first stage) with four movable nozzles. This motor is described in Table 11-3.
The differential throttling concept shown in Fig. 16-10 has no gimbal and
does not use any of the methods used with single nozzles as described in Fig.
16-3. It has four fixed thrust chambers and their axes are almost parallel to and
set off from the vehicle's centerline. Two of the four thrust chambers are
Stress-release
boot (unbonded) Internal External
insulation insulation
~--\---------294.87 inches
inches
I
Igniter
FIGURE 16--9. Simplified view of an early version of the first-stage Minuteman missile
motor using composite-type propellant bonded to the motor case. Four movable noz
zles provide pitch, yaw, and roll control. (Source: U.S. Air Force.)
16.4. INTEGRATION WITH VEHICLE 621
(@®\ (®CJ\
'Q_9) \f@_9)
Pitch Yaw Roll
FIGURE 16-10. Differential throttling with four fixed-position thrust chambers can
provide flight maneuvers. In this simple diagram the shaded nozzle exits indicate a
throttled condition or reduced thrust. The larger forces from the unthrottled engines
impose turning moments on the vehicle. For roll control the nozzles are slightly inclined
and their individual thrust vectors do not go through the center of gravity of the vehicle.
selectively throttled (typically the thrust is reduced by only 2 to 15% ). The four
nozzles may be supplied from the same feed system or they may belong to four
separate but identical rocket engines. This differential throttling system is used
on the Aerospike rocket engine described in Chapters 3 and 8 and on a Russian
launch vehicle.
16.3. TESTING
Testing of thrust vector control systems often includes actuation of the system
when assembled on the propulsion system and the vehicle. For example, the
Space Shuttle main engine can be put through some gimbal motions (without
rocket firing) prior to a flight. A typical acceptance test series of the TVC
system (prior to the delivery to an engine manufacturer) may include the
determination of input power, accuracy of deflected positions, angular speeds
or accelerations, signal response characteristics, or validation of overtravel
stops. The ability to operate under extreme thermal environment, operation
under various vehicle or propulsion system generated vibrations, temperature
cycling, and ignition shock (high momentary acceleration) would probably be a
part of the qualification tests.
Side forces and roll torques are usually relatively small compared to the
main thrust and the pitch or yaw torques. Their accurate static test measure
ment can be difficult, particularly at low vector angles. Elaborate, multicom
ponent test stands employing multiple load cells and isolation flextures are
needed to assure valid measurements.
16.4. INTEGRATION WITH VEHICLE
The actuations or movements of the TVC system are directed by the vehicle's
guidance and control system (see Ref. 16-5). This system measures the three-
622 THRUST VECTOR CONTROL
dimensional position, velocity vectors, and rotational rates of the vehicle and
compares them with the desired position, velocity, and rates. The error signals
between these two sets of parameters are transformed by computers in TVC
controllers into control commands for actuating the TVC system until the error
signals are reduced to zero. The vehicle's computer control system determines
the timing of the actuation, the direction, and magnitude of the deflection.
With servomechanisms, power supplies, monitoring/failure detection devices,
actuators with their controllers, and kinetic compensation, the systems tend to
become complex.
The criteria governing the selection and design of a TVC system stem from
vehicle needs and include the steering-force moments, force rates of change,
flight accelerations, duration, performance losses, dimensional and weight lim
itations, available vehicle power, reliability, delivery schedules, and cost. For
the TVC designer these translate into such factors as duty cycle, deflection
angle, angle slew rate, power requirement, kinematic position errors, and
many vehicle-TVC and motor-TVC interface details, besides the program
aspects of costs and delivery schedules.
Interface details include electrical connections to and from the vehicle flight
controller, the power supply, mechanical attachment with fasteners for actua
tors, and sensors to measure the position of the thrust axis or the actuators.
Design features to facilitate the testing of the TVC system, easy access for
checkout or repair, or to facilitate resistance to a high-vibration environment,
are usually included. The TVC subsystem is usually physically connected to the
vehicle and mounted to the rocket's nozzle. The designs of these components
must be coordinated and integrated. Nozzle-TVC interfaces are discussed in
Refs. 6---1 (TVC of liquid rocket engines and their control architecture) and
16-5.
The actuators can be hydraulic, pneumatic, or electromechemical (lead
screw), and usually include a position sensor to allow feedback to the con
troller. The proven power supplies include high-pressure cold stored gas,
batteries, warm gas from a gas generator, hydraulic fluid pressurized by
cold gas or a warm gas generator, electric or hydraulic power from the
vehicle's power supply, and electric or hydraulic power from a separate tur
bogenerator (in turn driven by a gas generator). The last type is used for
relatively long-duration high-power applications, such as the power package
used in the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster TVC, explained in Ref. 16-6.
The selection of the actuation scheme and its power supply depends on the
minimum weight, minimum performance loss, simple controls, ruggedness,
reliability, ease of integration, linearity between actuating force and vehicle
moments, cost, and other factors. The required frequency response is higher
if the vehicle is small, such as with small tactical missiles. The response listed
in Table 16---3 is more typical of larger spacecraft applications. Sometimes the
TVC system is integrated with a movable aerodynamic fin system, as shown
in Ref. 16---7.
REFERENCES 623
REFERENCES
16--1. A. Truchot, "Design and Analysis of Solid Rocket Motor Nozzles," Chapter 3 in
Design Methods in Solid Rocket Motors, AGARD Lecture Series 150, Advisory
Group for Aerospace Research and Development, NATO, Revised Version,
1988.
16-2. B. H. Prescott and M. Macocha, "Nozzle Design," pp. 177-186 in Chapter 6 of
G. E. Jensen and D. W. Netzer (Eds.), Tactical Missile Propulsion, Vol. 170 in
Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 1996.
16--3. G. E. Conner, R. L. Pollock, and M. R. Riola, "IUS Thrust Vector Control
Servo System," paper presented at 1983 JANNA F Propulsion Meeting, Monterey,
CA, February 1983.
16-4. M. Berdoyes, "Thrust Vector Control by Injection of Hot Gas Bleed from the
Chamber Hot Gas Valve," A/AA Paper 89-2867, July 1989.
16--5. J. H. Blakelock, Automatic Control of Aircraft and Missiles, 2nd ed., John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 1991, 656 pages.
16--6. A. A. McCool, A. J. Verble, Jr., and J. H. Potter, "Space Transportation
System's Rocket Booster Thrust Vector Control System," Journal of Spacecraft
and Rockets, Vol. 17, No. 5, September-October 1980, pp. 407-412.
16--7. S. R. Wassom, L. C. Faupel, and T. Perley, "Integrated Aerofin/Thrust Vector
Control for Tactical Missiles," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 7, No. 3,
May-June 1991, pp. 374-381.
CHAPTER 17
SELECTION OF ROCKET
PROPULSION SYSTEMS
With few exceptions, design problems have several possible engineering solu
tions from which to select. In this chapter we discuss in general terms the
process of selecting propulsion systems for a given mission. Three specific
aspects are covered in some detail:
1. A comparison of the merits and disadvantages of liquid propellant rocket
engines with solid propellant rocket motors.
2. Some key factors used in evaluating particular propulsion systems and
selecting from several competing candidate rocket propulsion systems.
3. The interfaces between the propulsion system and the flight vehicle and/
or the overall system.
A propulsion system is really a subsystem of a flight vehicle. The vehicle, in
turn, can be part of an overall system. An example of an overall system would
be a communications network with ground stations, computers, transmitters,
and several satellites; each satellite is a flight vehicle and has an attitude-control
propulsion system with specific propulsion requirements. The length of time in
orbit is a system parameter that affects the satellite size and the total impulse
requirement of its propulsion system.
Subsystems of a vehicle system (such as the structure, power supply, propul
sion, guidance, control, communications, ground support, or thermal control)
often pose conflicting requirements. Only through careful analyses and system
engineering studies is it possible to find compromises that allow all subsystems to
operate satisfactorily and be in harmony with each other. The subject of engi
neering design has advanced considerably in recent times and general refer
ences such as Ref. 17-1 should be consulted for details. Other works address
624
17.1. SELECTION PROCESS 625
the design of space systems (e.g., Refs. 17-2, 17-3) and the design of liquid
propellant engines (e.g., Ref. 17--4).
All mission (overall system), vehicle, and propulsion system requirements
can be related to either performance, cost, or reliability. For a given mission,
one of these criteria is usually more important than the other two. There is a
strong interdependence between the three levels of requirements and the three
categories of criteria mentioned above. Some of the characteristics of the pro
pulsion system (which is usually a second-tier subsystem) can have a strong
influence on the vehicle and vice versa. An improvement in the propulsion
performance, for example, can have a direct influence on the vehicle size, over
all system cost, or life (which can be translated into reliability and cost).
17.1. SELECTION PROCESS
The selection process is a part of the overall design effort for the vehicle system
and its rocket propulsion system. The selection is based on a series of criteria,
which are based on the requirements and which will be used to evaluate and
compare alternate propulsion systems. This process for determining the most
suitable rocket propulsion system depends on the application, the ability to
express many of the characteristics of the propulsion systems quantitatively,
the amount of applicable data that are available, the experience of those
responsible for making the selection, and the available time and resources to
examine the alternate propulsion systems. What is described here is one some
what idealized selection process as depicted in Fig. 17-1, but there are alternate
sequences and other ways to do this job.
All propulsion selections start with a definition of the overall system and its
mission. The mission's objectives, payload, flight regime, trajectory options,
launch scenarios, probability of mission success, and other requirements have
to be defined, usually by the organization responsible for the overall system.
Next, the vehicle has to be defined in conformance with the stated flight appli
cation. Only then can the propulsion system requirements be derived for the
specific mission and/or vehicle. For example, from the mission requirements it
is possible to determine the required mass fraction, the minimum specific
impulse, and the approximate total propellant mass, as shown in Chapter 4.
Furthermore, this can include propulsion parameters such as thrust-time pro
file, propellant mass fraction, allowable volume or envelope, typical pulsing
duty cycle, ambient temperature limits, thrust vector control needs, vehicle
interfaces, likely number of units to be built, prior applicable experience,
time schedule requirements, and cost limits.
Since the total vehicle's performance, flight control, operation, or mainte
nance are usually critically dependent on the performance, control, operation,
or maintenance of the rocket propulsion system (and vice versa), the process
will usually go through several iterations in defining both the vehicle and
propulsion requirements, which are then documented. This iterative process
626 SELECTION OF ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS
Define overall
mission/system
Prior experience
and vehicle
state of the art
Define and optimize
vehicle configuration
and flight regime
Conduct vehicle
optimization
studies
Candidate propulsion Derive rocket
systems and state propulsion
of the art requirements
Establish propulsion
selection criteria
Conduct evaluation
Obtain additional of candidate
data on some propulsion systems
propulsion Conduct propulsion
systems, run system
tests, validate optimization studies
key parameters Select most
suitable system
Check if it meets
the requirements
Design Define selected
reviews propulsion system,
specifications, CAD,
and solicit bids
FIGURE 17-1. Idealized process for selecting propulsion systems.
involves both the system organization (or the vehicle/system contractor) and
one or more propulsion organizations (or rocket propulsion contractors).
Documentation can take many forms; electronic computers have expanded
their capability to network, record, and retrieve documents.
A number of competing candidate systems are usually evaluated. They may
be proposed by different rocket propulsion organizations, perhaps on the basis
of modifications of some existing rocket propulsion system, or may include
some novel technology, or may be new types of systems specifically configured
to fit the vehicle or mission needs. In making these evaluations it will be
necessary to compare several candidate propulsion systems with each other
and to rank-order them (in accordance with the selection criteria) on how
well they meet each requirement. This requires analysis of each candidate
system and also, often, some additional testing. For example, statistical ana
lyses of the functions, failure modes, and safety factors of all key components
can lead to quantitative reliability estimates. For some criteria, such as safety
or prior related experience, it may not be possible to compare candidate sys
tems quantitatively but only somewhat subjectively.
Various rocket parameters for a particular mission need to be optimized.
Trade-off studies are used to determine the number of thrust chambers, engines
or motors, optimum chamber pressure, best packaging of the propulsion sys-
17.1. SELECTION PROCESS 627
tem(s), optimum mixture ratio, optimum number of stages in a multistage
vehicle, best trajectory, optimum nozzle area ratio, number of nozzles, TVC
(thrust vector control) concept, optimum propellant mixture ratio or solid
propellant formulation, and so on. These trade-off studies are usually aimed
at achieving the highest performance, highest reliability, or lowest cost for a
given vehicle and mission. Some of these optimizations are needed early in the
process to establish propulsion criteria, and some are needed in evaluating
competing candidate propulsion systems.
Early in the selection process a tentative recommendation is usually made as
to whether the propulsion system should be a solid propellant motor, a liquid
propellant engine, an electrical propulsion system, or some other type. Each
type has its own regime of thrust, specific impulse, thrust-to-weight ratio (accel
eration), or likely duration, as shown in Table 2-1 and Fig. 2-5; these factors
are listed for several chemical rocket engines and several types of non-chemical
engines. Liquid engines and solid motors are covered in Chapters 6 to 14,
hybrids in Chapter 15.
If an existing vehicle is to be upgraded or modified, its propulsion system is
usually also improved or modified (e.g., higher thrust, more total impulse, or
faster thrust vector control). While there might still be some trade-off studies
and optimization of the propulsion parameters that can be modified, one nor
mally does not consider an entirely different propulsion system as is done in an
entirely new vehicle or mission. Also, it is rare that an identical rocket propul
sion system is selected for two different applications; usually, some design
changes and interface modifications are necessary to adapt an existing rocket
propulsion system to another application. Proven existing and qualified pro
pulsion systems, that fit the desired requirements, usually have an advantage in
cost and reliability.
Electric propulsion systems have a set of unique applications with low
thrusts, low accelerations, trajectories exclusively in space, high specific
impulse, long operating times, and generally a relatively massive power supply
system. They perform well in certain space transfer and orbit maintenance
missions. With more electric propulsion systems flying than ever before, the
choice of proven electric propulsion thruster types is becoming larger. These
systems, together with design approaches, are described in Chapter 19 and Ref.
17-3.
When a chemical rocket is deemed most suitable for a particular application,
the selection has to be made between a liquid propellant engine, a solid pro
pellant motor, or a hybrid propulsion system. Some of the major advantages
and disadvantages of liquid propellant engines and solid propellant motors are
given in Tables 17-1 to 17--4. These lists are general in nature; some items can
be controversial, and a number are restricted to particular applications. Items
from this list can be transformed into evaluation criteria. For a specific mis
sion, the relevant items on these lists would be rank-ordered in accordance with
their relative importance. A quantification of many of the items would be
TABLE 17-1. Solid Propellant Rocket Advantages
Simple design (few or no moving parts).
Easy to operate (little preflight checkout).
Ready to operate quickly.
Will not leak, spill, or slosh.
Sometimes less overall weight for low total impulse application.
Can be throttled or stopped and restarted (a few times) if preprogrammed.
Can provide TVC, but at increased complexity.
Can be stored for 5 to 25 years.
Usually, higher overall density; this allows a more compact package, a smaller vehicle (less
drag).
Some propellants have nontoxic, clean exhaust gases, but at a performance penalty.
Some grain and case designs can be used with several nozzles.
Thrust termination devices permit control over total impulse.
Ablation and gasification of insulator, nozzle, and liner materials contribute to mass flow and
thus to total impulse.
Some tactical missile motors have been produced in large quantities (over 200,000 per year).
Can be designed for recovery, refurbishing, and reuse (Space Shuttle solid rocket motor).
TABLE 17-2. Liquid Propellant Rocket Advantages
Usually highest specific impulse; for a fixed propellant mass, this increases the vehicle velocity
increment and the attainable mission velocity.
Can be randomly throttled and randomly stopped and restarted; can be efficiently pulsed (some
small thrust sizes over 250,000 times). Thrust-time profile can be randomly controlled; this
allows a reproducible flight trajectory.
Cutoff impulse can be controllable wth thrust termination device (better control of vehicle
terminal velocity).
Can be largely checked out just prior to operation. Can be tested at full thrust on ground or
launch pad prior to flight.
Can be designed for reuse after field services and checkout.
Thrust chamber (or some part of the vehicle) can be cooled and made lightweight.
Storable liquid propellants have been kept in vehicle for more than 20 years and engine can be
ready to operate quickly.
With pumped propulsion feed systems and large total impulse, the inert propulsion system mass
(including tanks) can be very low (thin tank walls and low tank pressure), allowing a high
propellant mass fraction.
Most propellants have nontoxic exhaust, which is environmentally acceptable.
Same propellant feed system can supply several thrust chambers in different parts of the vehicle.
Can modify operating conditions during firing to prevent some failures that would otherwise
result in the loss of the mission or vehicle.
Can provide component redundancy (e.g., dual check valves or extra thrust chamber) to
enhance reliability.
With multiple engines, can design for operation with one or more shutoff (engine out
capability).
The geometry of low-pressure tanks can be designed to fit most vehicles' space constraints (i.e.,
mounted inside wing or nose cone).
The placement of propellant tanks within the vehicle can minimize the travel of the center of
gravity during powered flight. This enhances the vehicle's flight stability and reduces control
forces.
Plume radiation and smoke are usually low.
628
TABLE 17-3. Solid Propellant Rocket Disadvantages
Explosion and fire potential is larger; failure can be catastrophic; most cannot accept bullet
impact or being dropped onto a hard surface.
Many require environmental permit and safety features for transport on public conveyances.
Under certain conditions some propellants and grains can detonate.
Cumulative grain damage occurs through temperature cycling or rough handling; this limits the
useful Ii fe.
If designed for reuse, it requires extensive factory rework and new propellants.
Requires an ignition system.
Each restart requires a separate ignition system and additional insulation-in practice, one or
two restarts.
Exhaust gases are usually toxic for composite propellants containing ammonium perchlorate.
Some propellants or propellant ingredients can deteriorate (self-decompose) in storage.
Most solid propellant plumes cause more radio frequency attenuation than liquid propellant
plumes.
Only some motors can be stopped at random, but motor becomes disabled (not reusable).
Once ignited, cannot change predetermined thrust or duration. A moving pintle design with a
variety throat area will allow random thrust changes, but experience is limited.
If propellant contains more than a few percent particulate carbon, aluminum, or other metal, the
exhaust will be smoky and the plume radiation will be intense.
Integrity of grain (cracks, unbonded areas) is difficult to determine in the field.
Thrust and operating duration will vary with initial ambient grain temperature and cannot be
easily controlled. Thus the flight path, velocity, altitude, and range of a motor will vary with
the grain temperature.
Large boosters take a few seconds to start.
Thermal insulation is required in almost all rocket motors.
Cannot be tested prior to use.
Needs a safety provision to prevent inadvertent ignition, which would lead to an unplanned
motor firing. Can cause a disaster.
TABLE 17-4. Liquid Propellant Rocket Disadvantages
Relatively complex design, more parts or components, more things to go wrong.
Cryogenic propellants cannot be stored for long periods except when tanks are well insulated
and escaping vapors are recondensed. Propellant loading occurs at the launch stand and
requires cryogenic propellant storage facilities.
Spills or leaks of several propellants can be hazardous, corrosive, toxic, and cause fires, but this
can be minimized with gelled propellants.
More overall weight for most short-duration, low-total-impulse applications (low propellant
mass fraction).
Nonhypergolic propellants require an ignition system.
Tanks need to be pressurized by a separate pressurization subsystem. This can require high
pressure inert gas storage (2000 to 10,000 psi) for long periods of time.
More difficult to control combustion instability.
Bullet impact will cause leaks, sometimes a fire, but usually no detonations; gelled propellants
can minimize or eliminate these hazards.
A few propellants (e.g., red fuming nitric acid) give toxic vapors or fumes.
Usually requires more volume due to lower average propellant density and the relatively
inefficient packaging of engine components.
If vehicle breaks up and fuel and oxidizer are intimately mixed, it is possible (but not likely) for
an explosive mixture to be created.
Sloshing in tank can cause a flight stability problem, but it can be minimized with baffles.
If tank outlet is uncovered, aspirated gas can cause combustion interruption or combustion
vibration.
Smoky exhaust (soot) plume can occur with some hydrocarbon fuels.
Needs special design provisions for start in zero gravity.
With cryogenic liquid propellants there is a start delay caused by the time needed to cool the
system flow passage hardware to cryogenic temperatures.
Life of cooled large thrust chambers may be limited to perhaps 100 or more starts.
High-thrust unit requires several seconds to start.
629
630 SELECTION OF ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS
needed. These tables apply to generic rocket propulsion systems; they do not
cover systems that use liquid-solid propellant combinations.
A favorite student question has been: Which are better, solid or liquid
propellant rockets? A clear statement of strongly favoring one or the other
can only be made when referring to a specific set of flight vehicle missions.
Today, solid propellant motors seem to be preferred for tactical missiles (air
to-air, air-to-surface, surface-to-air, or short-range surface-to-surface) and bal
listic missiles (long- and short-range surface-to-surface) because instant readi
ness, compactness, and their lack of spills or leaks of hazardous liquids are
important criteria for these applications. Liquid propellant engines seem to be
preferred for space-launched main propulsion units and upper stages, because
of their higher specific impulse, relatively clean exhaust gases, and random
throttling capability. They are favored for post-boost control systems and
attitude control systems, because of their random multiple pulsing capability
with precise cutoff impulse, and for pulsed axial and lateral thrust propulsion
on hit-to-kill defensive missiles. However, there are always some exceptions to
these preferences.
When selecting the rocket propulsion system for a major new multiyear
high-cost project, considerable time and effort are spent in evaluation and in
developing rational methods for quantitative comparison. In part this is in
response to government policy as well as international competition. Multiple
studies are done by competing system organizations and competing rocket
propulsion organizations; formal reviews are used to assist in considering all
the factors, quantitatively comparing important criteria, and arriving at a
proper selection.
17.2. CRITERIA FOR SELECTION
Many criteria used in selecting a particular rocket propulsion system are pecu
liar to the particular mission or vehicle application. However, some of these
selection factors apply to a number of applications, such as those listed in
Table 17-5. Again, this list is incomplete and not all the criteria in this table
apply to every application. The table can be used as a checklist to see that none
of the criteria listed here are omitted.
Here are some examples of important criteria in a few specific applications.
For a spacecraft that contains optical instruments (e.g., telescope, horizon
seeker, star tracker, or infrared radiation seeker) the exhaust plume must be
free of possible contaminants that may deposit or condense on photovoltaic
cells, radiators, optical windows, mirrors, or lenses and degrade their perfor
mance, and free of particulates that could scatter sunlight into the instrument
aperture, which could cause erroneous signals. Conventional composite solid
propellants and pulsing storable bipropellants are usually not satisfactory, but
cold or heated clean gas jets (H 2, Ar, N 2, etc.) and monopropellant hydrazine
reaction gases are usually acceptable. Another example is an emphasis on
17.2. CRITERIA FOR SELECTION 631
smokeless propellant exhaust plumes, so as to make visual detection of a smoke
or vapor trail very difficult. This applies particularly to tactical missile applica
tions. Only a few solid propellants and several liquid propellants would be truly
smokeless and free of a vapor trail under all weather conditions.
Several selection criteria may be in conflict with each other. For example,
some propellants with a very high specific impulse are more likely to experience
combustion instabilities. In liquid propellant systems, where the oxidizer tank
is pressurized by a solid propellant gas generator and where the fuel-rich hot
gases are separated by a thin flexible diaphragm from the oxidizer liquid, there
is a trade-off between a very compact system and the potential for a damaging
system failure (fire, possible explosion, and malfunction of system) if the dia
phragm leaks or tears. In electric propulsion, high specific impulse is usually
accompanied by heavy power generating and conditioning equipment.
Actual selection will depend on the balancing of the various selection factors
in accordance with their importance, benefits, or potential impact on the sys
tem, and on quantifying as many of these selection factors as possible through
analysis, extrapolation of prior experience/data, cost estimates, weights, and/or
separate tests. Design philosophies such as the Taguchi methodology and TQM
(total quality management) can be inferred (Refs. 17-1 and 17-2). Layouts,
weight estimates, center-of-gravity analyses, vendor cost estimates, preliminary
stress or thermal analysis, and other preliminary design efforts are usually
necessary to put numerical values on some of the selection parameters. A
comparative examination of the interfaces of alternate propulsion systems is
also a part of the process. Some propulsion requirements are incompatible with
each other and a compromise has to be made. For example, the monitoring of
extra sensors can prevent the occurrence of certain types of failure and thus
enhance the propulsion system reliability, yet the extra sensors and control
components contribute to the system complexity and their possible failures
will reduce the overall reliability. The selection process may also include feed
back when the stated propulsion requirements cannot be met or do not make
sense, and this can lead to a revision of the initial mission requirements or
definition.
Once the cost, performance, and reliability drivers have been identified and
quantified, the selection of the best propulsion system for a specified mission
proceeds. The final propulsion requirement may come as a result of several
iterations and will usually be documented, for example in a propulsion require
ment specification. A substantial number of records is required (such as engine
or motor acceptance documents, CAD (computer-aided design) images, parts
lists, inspection records, laboratory test data, etc.). There are many specifica
tions associated with design and manufacturing as well as with vendors, mod
els, and so on. There must also be a disciplined procedure for approving and
making design and manufacturing changes. This now becomes the starting
point for the design and development of the propulsion system.
632 SELECTION OF ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS
TABLE 17.5. Typical Criteria Used in the Selection of a Particular Rocket
Propulsion System
Mission Definition
Purpose, function, and final objective of the mission of an overall system are well defined and
their implications well understood. There is an expressed need for the mission, and the benefits
are evident. The mission requirements are well defined. The payload, flight regime, vehicle,
launch environment, and operating conditions are established. The risks, as perceived, appear
acceptable. The project implementing the mission must have political, economic, and
institutional support with assured funding. The propulsion system requirements, which are
derived from mission definition, must be reasonable and must result in a viable propulsion
system.
Affordability (Cost)
Life cycle costs are low. They are the sum of R&D costs, production costs, facility costs,
operating costs, and decommissioning costs, from inception to the retirement of the system
(see Ref. 17-5). Benefits of achieving the mission should appear to justify costs. Investment in
new facilities should be low. Few, if any, components should require expensive materials. For
commercial applications, such as communications satellites, the return on investment must
look attractive. No need to hire new, inexperienced personnel, who need to be trained and are
more likely to make expensive errors.
System Performance
The propulsion system is designed to optimize vehicle and system performance, using the most
appropriate and proven technology. Inert mass is reduced to a practical minimum, using
improved materials and better understanding of loads and stresses. Residual (unused)
propellant is minimal. Propellants have the highest practical specific impulse without undue
hazards, without excessive inert propulsion system mass, and with simple loading, storing, and
handling (the specific impulse of the propulsion system is defined in Section 2.1 and is further
discussed in Section 19.1 ). Thrust-time profiles and number of restarts must be selected to
optimize the vehicle mission. Vehicles must operate with adequate performance for all the
possible conditions (pulsing, throttling, temperature excursions, etc.). Vehicles should be
storable over a specified lifetime. Will meet or exceed operational life. Performance parameters
(e.g., chamber pressure, ignition time, or nozzle area ratio) should be near optimum for the
selected mission. Vehicle should have adequate TVC. Plume characteristics are satisfactory.
Survivability ( Safety)
All hazards are well understood and known in detail. If failure occurs, the risk of personnel
injury, damage to equipment, facilities, or the environment is minimal. Certain mishaps or
failures will result in a change in the operating condition or the safe shutdown of the
propulsion system. Applicable safety standards must be obeyed. Inadvertent energy input to
the propulsion system (e.g., bullet impact, external fire) should not result in a detonation. The
probability for any such drastic failures should be very low. Safety monitoring and inspections
must have proven effective in identifying and preventing a significant share of possible
incipient failures (see Ref. 17-6). Adequate safety factors must be included in the design.
Spilled liquid propellants should cause no undue hazards. All systems and procedures must
conform to the safety standards. Launch test range has accepted the system as being safe
enough to launch.
Reliability
Statistical analyses of test results indicate a satisfactory high-reliability level. Technical risks,
manufacturing risks, and failure risks are very low, well understood, and the impact on the
overall system is known. There are few complex components. Adequate storage and operating
life of components (including propellants) have been demonstrated. Proven ability to check
out major part of propulsion system prior to use or launch. If certain likely failures occur, the
system must shut down safely. Redundancy of key components should be provided, where
effective. High probability that all propulsion functions must be performed within the desired
tolerances. Risk of combustion vibration or mechanical vibration should be minimal.
17.2. CRITERIA FOR SELECTION 633
TABLE 17-5 (Continued)
Controllability
Thrust buildup and decay are within specified limits. Combustion process is stable. The time
responses to control or command signals are within acceptable tolerances. Controls need to be
foolproof and not inadvertently create a hazardous condition. Thrust vector control response
must be satisfactory. Mixture ratio control must assure nearly simultaneous emptying of the
fuel and oxidizer tanks. Thrust from and duration of afterburning should be negligible.
Accurate thrust termination feature must allow selection of final velocity of flight. Changing
to an alternate mission profile should be feasible. Liquid propellant sloshing and pipe
oscillations need to be adequately controlled. In a zero-gravity environment, a propellant tank
should be essentially fully emptied.
Maintainability
Simple servicing, foolproof adjustments. easy parts replacement. and fast. reliable diagnosis of
internal failures or problems. Minimal hazard to service personnel. There must be easy access
to all components that need to be checked, inspected, or replaced. Trained maintenance
personnel are available. Good access to items which need maintenance.
Geometric Constraints
Propulsion system fits into vehicle, can meet available volume, specified length, or vehicle
diameter. There is usually an advantage for the propulsion system that has the smallest
volume or the highest average density. If the travel of the center of gravity has to be
controlled, as is necessary in some missions, the propulsion system that can do so with
minimum weight and complexity will be preferred.
Prior Related Experience
There is a favorable history and valid, available, relevant data of similar propulsion systems
supporting the practicality of the technologies. manufacturability, performance, and reliability.
Experience and data validating computer simulation programs are available. Experienced,
skilled personnel are available.
Operability
Simple to operate. Validated operating manuals exist. Procedures for loading propellants,
arming the power supply, launching, igniter checkout. and so on, must be simple. If
applicable, a reliable automatic status monitoring and check-out system should be available.
Crew training needs to be minimal. Should be able to ship the loaded vehicle on public roads
or railroads without need for environmental permits and without the need for a
decontamination unit and crew to accompany the shipment. Supply of spare parts must be
assured. Should be able to operate under certain emergency and overload conditions.
Producibility
Easy to manufacture, inspect, and assemble. All key manufacturing processes are well
understood. All materials are well characterized. critical material properties are well known,
and the system can be readily inspected. Proven vendors for key components have been
qualified. Uses standard manufacturing machinery and relatively simple tooling. Hardware
quality and propellant properties must be repeatable. Scrap should be minimal. Designs must
make good use of standard materials, parts. common fasteners. and off-the-shelf components.
There should be maximum use of existing manufacturing facilities and equipment. Excellent
reproducibility, i.e., minimal operational variation between identical propulsion units.
Validated specifications should be available for major manufacturing processes. inspection,
parts fabrication, and assembly.
Schedule
The overall mission can be accomplished on a time schedule that allows the system benefits to
be realized. R&D, qualification, flight testing, and/or initial operating capability are completed
on a preplanned schedule. No unforeseen delays. Critical materials and qualified suppliers
must be readily available.
634 SELECTION OF ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS
TABLE 17-5 (Continued)
Environmental Acceptabilitv
No unacceptable damage to personnel, equipment, or the surrounding countryside. No toxic
species in the exhaust plume. No serious damage (e.g., corrosion) due to propellant spills or
escaping vapors. Noise in communities close to a test or launch site should remain within
tolerable levels. Minimal risk of exposure to cancer-causing chemicals. Hazards must be
sufficiently low, so that issues on environmental impact statements are not contentious and
approvals by environmental authorities become routine. There should be compliance with
applicable laws and regulations. No unfavorable effects from currents generated by an
electromagnetic pulse, static electricity, or electromagnetic radiation.
Reusability
Some applications (e.g., Shuttle main engine, Shuttle solid rocket booster, or aircraft rocket
assisted altitude boost) require a reusable rocket engine. The number of flights, serviceability,
and the total cumulative firing time then become key requirements that will need to be
demonstrated. Fatigue failure and cumulative thermal stress cycles can be critical in some of
the system components. The critical components have been properly identified; methods,
instruments, and equipment exist for careful check-out and inspection after a flight or test
(e.g., certain leak tests, inspections for cracks, bearing clearances, etc.). Replacement and/or
repair of unsatisfactory parts should be readily possible. Number of firings before disassembly
should be large, and time interval between overhauls should be long.
Other Criteria
Radio signal attenuation by exhaust plume to be low. A complete propulsion system, loaded
with propellants and pressurizing fluids, can be storable for a required number of years
without deterioration or subsequent performance decrease. Interface problems are minimal.
Provisions for safe packaging and shipment are available. The system includes features that
allow decommissioning (such as to deorbit a spent satellite) or disposal (such as the safe
removal and disposal of over-age propellant from a refurbishable rocket motor).
17.3. INTERFACES
In Section 2 of this chapter the interfaces between the propulsion system and
the vehicle and/or overall system were identified as some of the criteria to be
considered in the selection of a propulsion system. A few rocket propulsion
systems are easy to integrate and interface with the vehicles. Furthermore,
these interfaces are an important aspect of a disciplined design and develop
ment effort. Table 17-6 gives a partial listing of typical interfaces that have
been considered in the propulsion system selection, design, and development. It
too may be a useful checklist. The interfaces assure system functionality and
compatibility between the propulsion system and the vehicle with its other
subsystems under all likely operating conditions and mission options.
Usually, an interface document or specification is prepared and it is useful to
designers, operating personnel, or maintenance people.
Besides cold gas systems, a simple solid propellant rocket motor has the
fewest and the least complex set of interfaces. A monopropellant liquid rocket
engine also has relatively few and simple interfaces. A solid propellant motor
with TVC and a thrust termination capability has additional interfaces, com
pared to a simple motor. Bipropellant rocket engines are more complex and the
17.3. INTERFACES 635
TABLE 17-6. Typical Interfaces between Rocket Propulsion Systems and Flight
Vehicle
Interface Category Typical Detailed Interfaces
Structural Interface (geometry/location/fastening mechanism) for
mounting propulsion system
Restraints on masses, moments of inertia, or the location
of the center of gravity
Type and degree of damping to minimize vibrations
Attachment of vehicle components to propulsion system
structure, such as wings, electrical components, TVC,
or skirts
Loads (aerodynamic, acceleration, vibrations, thrust,
sloshing, dynamic interactions) from vehicle to
propulsion system, and vice versa
Dimensional changes due to loads and/or heating and
means for allowing expansions or deflections to occur
without overstress
Interactions from vibration excitation
Mechanical Interfaces for electric connectors; for pneumatic,
hydraulic, propellant pipe connections
Volume/space available and geometric interference with
other subsystems
Access for assembly, part replacement, inspection,
maintenance, repair
Lifting or handling devices, and lifting attachment
locations
Measurement and adjustment of alignment of fixed
nozzles
Matching of thrust levels when two or more units are
fired simultaneously
Sealing or other closure devices to minimize air
breathing and moisture condensation in vented tanks,
cases, nozzles, porous insulation, or open pipes
Power Source and availability of power (usually electric, but
sometimes hydraulic or pneumatic) and their
connection interfaces
Identification of all users of power (solenoids,
instruments, TVC, igniter, sensors) and their duty
cycles. Power distribution to the various users
Conversion of power to needed voltages, dc/ac,
frequencies, or power level
Electric grounding connections of rocket motors, certain
electric equipment or pyrotechnic devices, to minimize
voltage buildup and prevent electrostatic discharges
Shielding of sensitive wires and/or high-voltage
components
Telemetry and radio communications interface
636 SELECTION OF ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS
TABLE 17-6 (Continued)
Interface Category Typical Detailed Interfaces
Heaters (e.g., to keep hydrazine from freezing or to
prevent ice formation and accumulation with cryogenic
propellants)
Interfaces with antennas, wiring, sensors, and electronic
packages located in the propulsion section of the
vehicle
Thermal management of heat generated in electric
components
Propellants Sharing of propellants between two or more propulsion
systems (main thrust chambers and attitude control
thrusters)
Control of sloshing to prevent center of gravity (CG)
excursions or to prevent gas from entering the liquid
propellant tank outlet
Design of solid propellant grain or liquid propellant
tanks to limit CG travel
Loading/unloading provisions for liquid propellants
Access for X-ray inspection of grain for cracks or
unbonded areas, while installed
Access to visually inspect grain cavity for cracks
Access to inspect cleanliness of tanks, pipes, valves
Connection of drain pipes for turbopump seal leakage
Vehicle flight control and Command signals (start/stop/throttle, etc.) interface
communications Feedback signals (monitoring the status of the
propulsion system, e.g., valve positions, thrust level,
remaining propellant, pump speed, pressures,
temperatures); telemetering devices
Range safety destruct system
Attitude control: command actuation in pitch, yaw, or
roll; feedback of TVC angle position and slew rate,
duty cycle, safety limits
Division of control logic, computer capability, or data
processing and databases between propulsion system
controller, vehicle controller, test stand controller, or
ground-based computer/controller system
Number and type of fault detection devices and their
connection methods
Thermal Heat from rocket gas/exhaust plume or aerodynamic
airflow will not overheat critical exposed components
Transfer of heat between propulsion system and the
vehicle
Provisions for venting cryogenic propellant tanks
overboard
Radiators for heat rejection
Interfaces for cooling, if any
17.3. INTERFACES 637
TABLE 17-6. (Continued)
Interface Category Typical Detailed Interfaces
Plume Radiative and convective heating of vehicle by plume
Impingement (forces and heating) of plume from attitude
control nozzle with vehicle components
Noise effects on equipment and surrounding areas
Contamination or condensation of plume species on
vehicle or payload parts, such as solar panels, optical
components of instruments, or radiation surfaces
Attenuation of radio signals
Safety Condition monitoring and sensing of potential imminent
failure and automatic remedial actions to prevent or
remedy impending failure (e.g., reduce thrust or shut
off one of several redundant propulsion systems)
Arming and disarming of igniter. Access to safe & arm
device
Safe disposal of hazardous liquid propellant leaking
through pump shaft seal, valve stem seal, or vented
from tanks
Designed to avoid electrostatic buildup and discharge
Ground support equipment Interface with standby power system
Interfaces with heating/cooling devices on ground at
launch or test site
Supply and loading method for liquid propellant,
pressurizing gases, and other fluids. Also, interface
with method for unloading these
Electromechanical checkout
Interface with ground systems for flushing, cleaning,
drying the tanks and piping
Transportation vehicles/boxes/vehicle erection devices
Lifting devices and handling equipment
Interface with fire extinguishing equipment on ground
number and difficulty of interfaces increase if they have a turbopump feed
system, throttling features, TVC, or pulsing capability. In electric propulsion
systems the number and complexity of interfaces is highest for an electrostatic
thruster with pulsing capability, when compared to electrothermal systems.
More complex electrical propulsion systems generally give higher values of
specific impulse. If the mission includes the recovery and reuse of the propul
sion system or a manned vehicle (where the crew can monitor and override the
propulsion system commands), this will introduce additional interfaces, safety
features, and requirements.
638 SELECTION OF ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS
REFERENCES
17-1. A. Ertas and J. C. Jones, The Engineering Design Process, 2nd Edition, John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1996.
17-2. J.C. Blair and R. S. Ryan, "Role of Criteria in Design and Management of Space
Systems," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 31, No. 2, March-April 1994,
pp. 323-329.
17-3. R. W. Humble, G. N. Henry, and W. J. Larson, Space Propulsion Analysis and
Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995.
17-4. D. K. Huzel and D. H. Huang, Modern Engineering for Design of Liquid
Propellant Rocket Engines, Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 147,
AIAA, Washington, DC, 1992.
17-5. C. J. Meis!, "Life Cycle Cost Considerations for Launch Vehicle Liquid
Propellant Engine," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 4, No. 2, March
April 1988, pp. 117-119.
17-6. A. Norman, I. Cannon, and L. Asch, "The History and Future Safety
Monitoring in Liquid Rocket Engines," A/AA Paper 89-2410, presented at the
25th Joint Propulsion Conference, July 1989.
CHAPTER 18
ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
The behavior of rocket exhaust plumes is included in this book because it has
gained importance in recent years. In this chapter we provide an introduction
to the subject, general background, a description of various plume phenomena
and their effects, and references for further study.
The plume is the moving formation of hot rocket exhaust gases (and some
times also entrained small particles) outside the rocket nozzle. This gas forma
tion is not uniform in structure, velocity, or composition. It contains several
different flow regions and supersonic shock waves. It is usually visible as a
brilliant flame, emits intense radiation energy in the infrared, visible, and ultra
violet segments of the spectrum, and is a strong source of noise. Many plumes
leave a trail of smoke or vapor or toxic exhaust gases. At higher altitudes some
of the plume gases can flow backward around the nozzle and reach compo
nents of the flight vehicle.
The plume characteristics (size, shape, structure, emission intensity of
photons or sound pressure waves, visibility, electrical interference, or smoki
ness) depend not only on the characteristics of the particular rocket propulsion
system or its propellants, but also on the flight path, flight velocity, altitude,
weather conditions, such as winds, humidity, or clouds, and the particular
vehicle configuration. Progress has been steady in recent decades in gaining
understanding of the complex, interacting physical, chemical, optical, aerody
namic, and combustion phenomena within plumes by means of laboratory
experiments, computer simulation, measurements on plumes during static fir
ing tests, flight tests, or simulated altitude tests in vacuum test chambers. Yet
much is not fully understood or predictable. As shown in Table 18-1, there are
639
640 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
TABLE 18-1. Applications of Plume Technology
Design/develop/operate Flight Vehicles, their Propulsion
Systems, and Launch Stands or Launch Equipment
For a given propulsion system and operating conditions (altitudes, weather, speed,
afterburning, with atmospheric oxygen, etc.) determine or predict the plume
dimensions, temperature profiles, emissions, or other plume parameters.
Determine likely heat transfer to components of vehicle, test facility, propulsion
system or launcher, and prevent damage by design changes. Include afterburning
and recirculation.
Estimate the ability of vehicle and test facilities to withstand intensive plume noise.
Determine the aerodynamic interaction of the plume with the airflow around the
vehicle, which can cause changes in drag.
Reduce impingement on vehicle components (e.g., plumes from attitude control
thrusters hitting a solar panel); this can cause excessive heating or impingement
forces that may turn the vehicle.
Estimate and minimize erosion effects on vehicle or launcher components.
Prevent deposits of condensed species on spacecraft windows, optical surfaces, solar
panels, or radiating heat emission surfaces.
Determine the backscatter of sunlight by plume particulates or condensed species,
and minimize the scattered radiation that can reach into optical instruments on the
vehicle, because this can give erroneous signals.
Protect personnel using a shoulder-fired rocket launcher from heat, blast, noise,
smoke, and toxic gas.
Detect and Track Flight (Jj" Vehicles
Analysis and/or measurement of plume emission spectrum or signature.
Identify plumes of launch vehicles from a distance when observing from spacecraft,
aircraft, or ground stations, using IR, UV, or visible radiations and/or radar
reflections.
Distinguish their emissions from background signals.
Detect and identify smoke and vapor trails.
Track and predict the flight path.
Alter the propellant or the nozzle to minimize the radiation, radar signature, or
smoke emissions.
Estimate weather conditions for appearance of secondary smoke.
Develop Sensors for Measuring Plume Phenomena
Improve calibration and data interpretation.
Develop improved and novel instruments for plume measurements, for both remote
and close by locations.
18.1. PLUME APPEARANCE AND FLOW BEHAVIOR 641
TABLE 18-1. (Continued)
Improve Understanding of Plume Behavior
Improve theoretical approaches to plume phenomena.
Improve or create novel computer simulations.
Provide further validation of theory by experimental results from flight tests,
laboratory investigations, static tests, or tests in simulated altitude facilities.
Understand and minimize the generation of high-energy noise.
Understand the mechanisms of smoke, soot, or vapor formation, thus learning how
to control them.
Provide a better understanding of emission, absorption, and scatter within plume.
Provide a better prediction of chemiluminescence.
Understand the effect of shock waves, combustion vibration, or flight maneuvers on
plume phenomena.
Understand the effects of plume remains on the stratosphere or ozone layer.
Develop a better algorithm for simulating turbulence in different parts of the plume.
Minimize Radio-Frequency Interference
Determine the plume attenuation for specific antennas and antenna locations on the
vehicle.
Reduce the attenuation of radio signals that have to pass through the plume,
typically between an antenna on the vehicle and an antenna on the ground or on
another vehicle.
Reduce radar reflections from plumes.
Reduce the electron density and electron collision frequency in the plume; for
example, by reducing certain impurities in the gas, such as sodium.
many applications or situations where a prediction or a quantitative under
standing of plume behavior is needed.
18.1. PLUME APPEARANCE AND FLOW BEHAVIOR
The size, shape, and internal structure of a plume changes dramatically with
altitude. Figure 18-1 shows the construction of a low-altitude plume at heights
typically between 3 and 10 km. The plume diameter and length are often
several times larger than the vehicle diameter and length. In the near field
there is an inviscid inner core (exhaust gases that have not yet mixed with
air) and a relatively thin outer mixing layer where oxygen from the air burns
turbulently with the fuel-rich species in the exhaust gases. In the far field the
ambient air and exhaust gases are well mixed throughout a cross section of the
plume, and the local pressure is essentially that of the ambient air. In the
intermediate field the shock wave intensities diminish and more of the mass
flow is mixed with ambient air. The radiation emissions come from all parts of
642 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
Thickness of mixing or
afterburning layer increases
with length
Near field ---Transition region------1<--Far field----
Velocity profile
supersonic
core with
shock waves
or normal shock
Inviscid supersonic region
FIGURE 18-1. Half sections of schematic diagrams of a rocket exhaust plume at low
altitude. Upper sketch shows full plume and lower sketch is an enlargement of the near
field. (Reprinted with permission from Ref. 18-1.)
the plume, whereas the interactions with the vehicle occur only as a result of
near-field phenomena.
Figure 18-2 shows sketches of the variation of the plume configuration with
altitude. When the nozzle exit pressure is approximately equal to the ambient
pressure (condition for optimum nozzle expansion), the plume has a long,
nearly cylindrical shape. With increasing altitude the plume shape becomes
more of a cone and the plume length and diameter increase. The core of the
plume emerges supersonically from the nozzle exit and goes through an oblique
compression shock wave, known as the barrel wave, which originates near the
nozzle exit lip and has the approximate shape of an inverted but somewhat
curved cone. The central part of the plume then goes through the Mach disk,
which is a strong normal compression shock wave; here the gases suddenly
slow down in velocity and are raised to a higher pressure and temperature. The
flow immediately behind the Mach disk is subsonic for a short distance, but
downstream again becomes supersonic. This pattern of normal shock waves
and short subsonic zones is repeated several times in the core of the plume, but
the strength of the shock and the rises in temperature or pressure are reduced in
each sequence.
Bow shock
wave (air)
Plume
configuration
. ·: · Mixing or ____;;;· .:/-'·
,:>
· · ·---------------after burning -------,':· _
region
Inner Narrow, can see several shock diamonds Larger diameter, some shockwave pattern, Only one or two sets of shock waves are visible
supersonic fewer visible shock waves
core
Mixing layer Narrow Wider, unsteady, turbulent Very wide, irregular
(afterburning)
Nozzle exit P2 ~P3 P2 > P3 P2 >> P3
pressure pz
and ambient
pressure p3
Flight Very low, subsonic Subsonic, transonic and slighty supersonic Supersonic
velocity
Altitude,
km Oto 5 10 to 25 Above 35
FIGURE 18-2. The visible plume grows in length and diameter as the rocket vehicle gains altitude. The afterburning of the fuel
rich combustion products with the oxygen from the air occurs in the mixing layer. At very high altitude, above perhaps 200 km,
there is no air and therefore no afterburning.
644 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
The ambient air mixes with the hot exhaust gases and secondary combustion
or afterburning occurs in the mixing layer. It is a turbulent layer surrounding
the core and its thickness increases with distance from the nozzle as well as with
altitude. The incompletely oxidized fuel species in the exhaust gases, such as
H 2, CO, NO, or CH 2, react chemically with the oxygen from the atmosphere
and are largely burned to H 20, CO 2, or N0 2, and the heat of this secondary
combustion raises the temperature and the specific volume in this afterburning
layer. As explained in Chapter 5, most propellants are fuel rich to achieve
optimum specific impulse or optimum flight performance, so additional oxida
tive heat release is possible.
As the altitude increases, the ambient local air pressure decreases by several
orders of magnitude and the pressure ratio in the gases between the nozzle exit
and the local ambient pressure is increased greatly, approaching infinity when
the rocket operates in a vacuum in space. With higher altitudes, further expan
sion (increase in specific volume) occurs and this causes a further reduction of
gas temperatures and an expansion in both diameter and length; for the prin
cipal propulsion systems these usually exceed the dimensions of the vehicle.
Some species in the plume will condense and become liquid; they will freeze as
the temperature drops and gases like H 0 or CO will form clouds or a vapor
2 2
trail.
As the vehicle attains supersonic velocity (relative to the ambient air) two
shock waves form. One is an oblique compression shock wave in the air ahead
of the vehicle and the other is a trailing wave originating at the vehicle's tail,
where the air meets the exhaust plume gases. These wave fronts are usually
luminescent and highly visible and can reach diameters of several kilometers.
As the supersonic exhaust gas flow emerges from the nozzle, it experiences
Prandtl-Meyer-type expansion waves, which attach themselves to the nozzle
lip. This expansion allows the outer streamlines just outside the nozzle to be
bent and an increase in the Mach number of the gases in the outer layers of the
plume. This expansion can, at higher altitudes, cause some portion of the
supersonic plume to be bent by more than 90° from the nozzle axis. The
theoretical limit of a Prandtl-Meyer expansion is about 129° for gases with k =
1.4 (air) and about 160° for gases with k = 1.3 (typical for a rocket exhaust
mixture; see Ref. 18-2). This backward flow needs to be analyzed to estimate
the heat and impingement effects and possible contamination of vehicle com
ponents (see Ref. 18-3).
The boundary layer next to the nozzle wall is a region of viscous flow, and
the flow velocity is lower than in the main nozzle inviscid flow. The velocity
decreases to zero right next to the wall. For large nozzles this boundary layer
can be quite thick, say 2 cm or more. Figure 3-16 shows a subsonic and a
supersonic region within the boundary layer inside the nozzle divergent section;
it also shows a temperature and a velocity profile. While the supersonic flow
layer is restricted in the angle through which it can be deflected, the subsonic
boundary layer flow at the nozzle lip is in a continuum regime and may be
deflected up to 180°. Although the subsonic boundary layer represents only a
18.1. PLUME APPEARANCE AND FLOW BEHAVIOR 645
small portion of the mass flow, it nevertheless lets its exhaust gases flow back
ward on the outside of the nozzle. This backflow has caused heating of and
sometimes chemical damage to the vehicle and propulsion system parts.
The mass distribution or relative density is not uniform, as can be seen in
Fig. 18-3, which is based on a calculated set of data for a high-altitude plume.
Here 90% of the flow is within ±44° of the nozzle axis and only one hundred
thousandth or 10-5 of the total mass flow is bent by more than 90°. The flow
near the center contains most of the heavier molecules, such as CO 2, N0 2, or
CO, and the outer regions, which are deflected the most, consist largely of the
lighter species, such as mostly H and perhaps some H 0.
2 2
Figure 18--4 shows the drastic change (log scale) in the overall radiation
emission intensity as a function of altitude for a typical three-stage satellite
launch to a 300- to 500-km orbit or a long-range ballistic missile with a booster
stage, a sustainer stage, and a payload velocity adjustment stage. The booster
stage rocket propulsion system gives the largest intensity because it has the
Mass fraction= 10-10 10-7 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2
1 1
10.---r-~..,,...:..'---.--'.:.-,.'~-.i-~T,"-""-,--.--,-----.~,
9
8
7
~ 6 10-l
Cl) /
t)
C
-~ 5
u
ro
~ 4
a::
3
2
OL--~_L._~-L___..;~.:s.a..:,~~~~~--U.~~LL-~..LL...~_._...___.
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 2 3 4 5
Axial distance xi Re
FIGURE 18--3. Density profile for vacuum plume expansion using a one-dimensional
flow model for a small storable bipropellant thruster. The axial distance x and the plume
radius R have been normalized with the nozzle exit radius Re· Here k = 1.25, the Mach
number of the nozzle exit is 4.0, and the nozzle cone half angle is 19°.
646 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
Vacuum
Afterburning
limit
flame diameter
0.07-10 m dia.
is -10-100 m Continuum Molecular
flow regime flow regime
-0.1-1 km dia. -1-10 km dia.
Flow transition boundary
Attitude
control or
/orbit
----......,.----: adjustment
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 200 300 400 500
Altitude, km
FIGURE 18---4. For a multistage ascending vehicle the plume radiation intensity will
vary with the altitude, thrust or mass flow, propellant combination, and plume tem
perature. The four sketches describing the plume are not drawn to the same scale.
highest rocket gas mass flow or the highest thrust, a relatively dense plume, and
its radiation is enhanced by afterburning of the fuel-rich gas with oxygen from
the air. The rise in the intensity of the sustainer stage is due to the large increase
in plume volume caused by the expansion of the exhaust gases. Both operate in
that part of the atmosphere where continuum flow prevails; that is, the mean
free paths of the molecular motions are relatively small, frequent collisions
between molecules occur, the gases follow the basic gas laws, and they can
experience compression or expansion waves.
As higher altitude is reached the continuum regime changes into a free mole
cular flow regime, where there are fewer molecules per unit volume and the mean
free path of the molecules between collisions becomes larger than the key
dimension of the vehicle (e.g., length). Here the plume spreads out even more,
reaching diameters in excess of 10 km. Only the exhaust gases close to the nozzle
exit experience continuum flow conditions, which allows the streamlines in the
flow to spread out by means of successive Prandtl-Meyer expansion waves;
once the gas reaches the boundary shown by the elliptical dashed line in the
last sketch on the right in Fig. 18-4, the flow will be in the free molecular flow
regime and molecules will continue to spread out in straight lines. The regions of
free molecular flow and the transition from continuum flow can be analyzed as
shown as Ref. 18-4. The third or upper stage, which operates at very high
altitudes, has very low emission intensity, because it has a relatively very low
gas flow or thrust and because only the inviscid portion of the exhaust gas flow
near the nozzle is hot enough to radiate significant energy. This makes it difficult
to detect and identify from a distance. The phenomenology of rocket exhaust
plumes as seen from a space-based surveillance system is described in Ref. 18-5.
18.1. PLUME APPEARANCE AND FLOW BEHAVIOR 647
Spectral Distribution of Radiation
The primary radiation emissions from most of the plume gases are usually in
the infrared spectrum, to a lesser extent in the ultraviolet spectrum, with rela
tively little energy in the visible spectrum. The emissions depend on the parti
cular propellants and their respective exhaust gas compositions. For example,
the exhaust from the liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen propellant combination
contains mostly water vapor and hydrogen, and with a minor percentage of
oxygen and dissociated species. Its radiation is strong in specific wavelength
bands characteristic of the emissions from these hot gases (such as 2.7 and 6.3
µm, water-infrared region) and 122 nanometers (hydrogen-ultraviolet
region). As shown in Fig. 18-5, the hydrogen-oxygen plume is essentially
transparent or colorless, since there are no strong emissions in the visible
segment of the spectrum. The propellant combination of nitrogen tetroxide
with methylhydrazine fuel gives strong emissions in the infrared region; in
addition to the strong emissions for H 0 and hydrogen mentioned previously,
2
there are strong emissions for CO at 4.7 µm, CO at 4.3 µm, and weaker
2
FIGURE 18-5. Visible plume created by the oxygen-hydrogen propellants of the
Vulcain 60 thrust chamber, with a specific impulse of 439 sec at altitude, a nozzle
expansion area ratio of 45, and a mixture ratio of 5.6. Multiple shockwave patterns
are visible in the core of the plume because of emissions from luminescent minor species.
(Courtesy of ESA/CNES/SEP/Daimler-Benz, Europe.)
648 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
emission in the ultraviolet (UV) and visible ranges (due to bands of CN, CO,
N 2, NH 3, and other intermediate and final gaseous reaction products). This
gives it a pink orange-yellow color, but the plume is still partly transparent.
The exhausts of many solid propellants and some liquid propellants contain
also solid particles. In Tables 5-8 and 5-9 examples of solid propellant were
given that had about I 0% of small particles as aluminum oxide (Al 20 3) in their
incandescent white exhaust plumes; some kerosene-burning liquid propellants
and most solid propellants have a small percentage of soot or small carbon
particles in their exhaust. The radiation spectrum from hot solids is a contin
uous one, which peaks usually in the infrared (IR) region, but it also has strong
emissions in the visible or UV region; this continuous spectrum is usually
stronger in the visible range than the narrow-band emissions from the gaseous
species in the plume. Afterburning increases the temperature of the particles by
several hundred degrees and intensifies their radiation emissions. With 2 to 5%
solid particles, the plumes radiate brilliantly and are therefore very visible to
the eye. However, these particles in the outer layers of the plume obscure the
central core and the shock wave patterns can no longer be observed.
The visible radiation of plumes from double-base propellant can be reduced
or suppressed by adding a small amount (1 to 3%) of potassium compound.
With composite propellants the control of visible emissions by additives has
not been as effective.
The radiation (which is a function of the absolute temperature to the fourth
power) cools the plume gases, but it also heats adjacent vehicle or propulsion
system components. The prediction of radiative emission requires an under
standing of the plume composition, the temperature and density distribution in
the plume and the absorption of radiation by intervening atmospheric or plume
gases (see Refs. 18-5 to 18-7). The heat transferred from the plume to vehicle
components will depend on the propellant combination, the nozzle configura
tion, the vehicle geometry, the number of nozzles, the trajectory, altitude, and
the secondary turbulent flow around the nozzles and the tail section of the
vehicle.
The observed or measured values of the radiation emissions have to be
corrected. The signal strength diminishes as the square of the distance between
the plume and the observation station, and its observed magnitude can change
tremendously during a flight. The attenuation is a function of wavelength, rain,
fog or clouds, the mass of air and plume gas between the hot part of the plume
and the observing location, and depends on the flight vector direction relative
to the line of sight. The total emission is a maximum when seen at right angles
to the plume (see Refs. 18-5 to 18-7). Radiation measurements can be biased
by background radiations (important in satellite observation) or Doppler shift.
Multiple Nozzles
It is common to have more than one propulsion system operating at the same
time, or more than one nozzle sending out hot exhaust gas plumes. For exam-
18.1. PLUME APPEARANCE AND FLOW BEHAVIOR 649
pie, the Space Shuttle has three main engines and two solid rocket boosters
running simultaneously. The interference and impingement of these plumes
with one another will cause regions of high temperature in the combined
plumes and therefore larger emissions, but the emissions will no longer be
axisymmetrical. Also, the multiple nozzles can cause distortions in the airflow
near the rear end of the vehicle and influence the vehicle drag and augment the
hot backflow from the plume locally.
Plume Signature
This is the term used for all the characteristics of the plume in the infrared,
visible, and ultraviolet spectrum, its electron density, smoke or vapor, for a
particular vehicle, mission, rocket propulsion system, and propellant (see Refs.
18-8 to 18-10). In many military applications it is desirable to reduce the
plume signature in order to minimize being detected or tracked. The initial
stagnation temperature of the nozzle exit gas is perhaps the most significant
factor influencing plume signature. As plume temperatures increase, higher
levels of radiation and radio-frequency interaction will occur. Emissions can
be reduced if a propellant combination or mixture ratio with a lower combus
tion temperature is selected; unfortunately, this usually gives a lower perfor
mance. One way to reduce smoke is to choose a reduced-smoke or minimum
smoke solid propellant; they are described in Chapter 12. The plume signature
is today often specified as a requirement for a new or modified rocket-propelled
vehicle, and it imposes limits on spectral emissions in certain regions of the
spectrum and on the amount of acceptable smoke.
The atmosphere absorbs energy in certain regions of the spectrum. For
example, the air contains some carbon dioxide and water vapor. These mole
cules absorb and attenuate the radiation in the frequency bands peculiar to
these two species. Since many plume gases contain a lot of CO or H 0, the
2 2
attenuation within the plume itself can be significant. The plume energy or
intensity, as measured by spectrographic instruments, has to be corrected for
the attenuation of the intervening air or plume gas.
Vehicle Base Geometry and Recirculation
The geometry of the nozzle exit(s) and the flight vehicle's tail or aft base have
an influence on the plume. Figure 18-6 shows a single nozzle exit whose dia
meter is almost the same as the base or tail diameter of the vehicle body. If
these two diameters are not close to each other, then a flat doughnut-shaped
base or tail surface will exist. In this region the high-speed combustion gas
velocity is larger than the air speed of the vehicle (which is about the same as
the local air velocity relative to the vehicle) and an unsteady flow vortex type
recirculation will occur. This greatly augments the afterburning, the heat
release to the base, and usually creates a low pressure on this base. This
lower pressure in effect increases the vehicle's drag.
650 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
Airflow
Rocket _,,, Mixing layer
propulsion
system
Airflow
/ Mixing layer
Aft end
Annular recirculation zone
FIGURE 18-6. Diagrams of flow patterns around two different boat tails or vehicle aft
configurations, with and without hot gas recirculation.
The air flow pattern at the vehicle tail can be different with different tail
geometries, such as cylinder (straight), a diminishing diameter, or an increasing
diameter conical shape, which helps to maintain the vehicle's aerodynamic
stability. The air flow pattern and the mixing layer change dramatically with
angle of attack, causing an unsymmetrical plume shape. Flow separation of the
air flow can also occur. In some cases the recirculation of fuel-rich exhaust gas
mixed with air will ignite and burn; this dramatically increases the heat transfer
to the base surfaces and causes some changes in plume characteristics.
Compression and Expansion Waves
A shock wave is a surface of discontinuity in a supersonic flow. In rocket
plumes it is the very rapid change of kinetic energy to potential and thermal
energy within that very thin wave surface. Fluid crossing a stationary shock
wave rises suddenly and irreversibly in pressure and decreases in velocity.
When it passes through a shock wave surface that is perpendicular or normal
to the incoming supersonic flow, then there is no change in flow direction. Such
a normal shock produces the largest increase in pressure (and local down
stream temperature) and is known as a normal shock wave. The flow velocity
18.1. PLUME APPEARANCE AND FLOW BEHAVIOR 651
behind a normal shock wave is subsonic. When the incoming flow is at an angle
less than 90° to the shock wave surface, it is known as a weak compression wave
or as an oblique shock wave. Figure 18-7 illustrates the flow relationships and
shows the angle of flow change. The temperature of the gas immediately behind
a normal shock wave approaches the stagnation temperature. Here the radia
tion increases greatly. Also, here (and in other hot plume regions) dissociation
of gas species and chemical luminescence (emission of visible light) can occur,
as can be seen (downstream of strong shock waves) in Fig. 18-5.
The behavior of gas expansion in the supersonic flow has a fairly similar
geometric relationship. It occurs at a surface where the flow undergoes a
Prandtl-Meyer expansion wave, which is a surface where pressure is reduced
and velocities are increased. Often there is a series of weak expansion waves
next to each other; this occurs outside the lip of the diverging nozzle exit
section when the nozzle exit gas pressure is higher than the ambient pressure,
as shown in Fig. 18-1.
The plume from hydrogen-oxygen liquid propellant combustion consists
mostly of superheated water vapor and hydrogen gas and is basically invisible.
However, it is faintly visible because of the chemically generated luminescence
that is believed to be responsible for the pale pink orange and white skeletal
wave pattern, particularly in its hot regions. The patterns are shown in Figs.
18-2 and 18-5.
The supersonic gas flow out of the nozzle exit is undisturbed until it changes
direction in a wave front or goes through a normal shock. Diamond-shaped
Oblique shock wave Normal shock wave
(compression) (compression)
Expansion wave Multiple expansion waves
FIGURE 18-7. Simplified diagrams of oblique shock wave or compression wave, nor
mal shock wave, and expansion wave. The change in the length of the arrows is an
indication of the change in gas velocity as the flow crosses the wave front.
652 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
patterns are formed by compression and expansion wave surfaces. These pat
terns (shown in Figs. 18-2 and 18-5) then repeat themselves and are clearly
visible in largely transparent plumes, such as those from hydrogen-oxygen or
alcohol-oxygen propellant combinations. The pattern becomes weaker with
each succeeding wave. The mixing layer acts as a reflector, because an expan
sion wave is reflected as a compression wave.
The inter-face surface between the rocket exhaust plume gas and the air
flowing over the vehicle (or the air aspirated by the high velocity plume) acts
as a free boundary. Oblique shock waves are reflected at a free boundary as an
opposite wave. For example, an oblique compression wave is reflected as an
oblique expansion wave. This boundary is not usually a simple surface of
revolution, but an annular layer, sometimes called a slip stream or mixing
layer. See Figs. 8-1, 8-2, and 8-5.
18.2. PLUME EFFECTS
Smoke and Vapor Trails
Smoke is objectionable in a number of military missiles. It interferes with the
transmission of optical signals, such as with a line-of-sight or electro-optical
guidance system. Smoke would also hamper the vision of a soldier who guides
a wire-controlled anti-tank weapon. Smoke, or a vapor trail, allows easy and
rapid detection of a missile being fired, and visually tracking the flight path can
reveal a covert launch site. Smoke is produced not only during rocket opera
tion, but also by chuffing, the irregular combustion of propellant remainders
after rocket cutoff. Chuffing, described in Chapter 13, produces small puffs of
flame and smoke at frequencies of perhaps 10 to 150 Hz.
Primary smoke is a suspension of many very small solid particles in a gas,
whereas secondary smoke is a set of condensed small liquid droplets suspended
in a gas, such as condensed moisture-forming clouds, fog, or mist. Many
propellants leave visible trails of smoke and/or vapor from their plumes during
powered rocket flight (see Refs. 18-8 to 18-10). These trails are shifted by local
winds after the vehicle has passed. They are most visible in the daytime,
because they depend on reflected or scattered sunlight. The solid particles
that form the primary smoke are mainly aluminum oxide (Al 20 3, typically
0.1 to 3 µm diameter) in composite propellants. Other solid particles in the
exhaust of solid propellant are unburned aluminum, zirconium or zirconium
oxide (from combustion stabilizer), or iron or lead oxides (in burn-rate cata
lyst). Carbon particles or soot can be formed from various solid propellants
and liquid propellants using hydrocarbon fuels.
During the external expansion of rocket exhaust plume gases the gas mix
ture is cooled by radiation, gas expansion, and convection with colder ambient
air to below its dew-point temperature, where the water vapor condenses. Of
course, this depends on local weather conditions. If the ambient temperature is
18.2. PLUME EFFECTS 653
low (e.g., at high altitude) and/or if the gas expands to low temperatures, the
water droplets can freeze to form small ice crystals or snow. At high altitude,
CO 2, HCI, and other gases can also condense. Many rocket exhaust gases
contain between 5 and 35% water, but the exhaust from the liquid hydro
gen/liquid oxygen propellant combination can contain as much as 80%. If
the exhaust contains tiny solid particles, these then act as nuclei upon which
water vapor can condense, thus increasing the amount of nongaseous material
in the plume, making the plume even more visible.
If reducing smoke in the plume is important to the mission, then a reduced
smoke solid propellant or a minimum-smoke propellant is often used. They are
described in Chapter 12. Even then, a secondary smoke trail can be formed
under cold-weather and high-humidity conditions. However, under most
weather conditions it will be difficult to see a trail containing vapor only.
Toxicity
The exhaust gases from many rocket propulsion systems contain toxic and/or
corrosive gas species, which can cause severe health hazards and potential
environmental damage near launch or test sites. Accidental spills of some
liquid oxidizers, such as nitrogen tetroxide or red fuming nitric acid, can create
toxic, corrosive gas clouds, which have higher density than air and will stay
close to the ground. Exhaust gases such as CO or CO present a health hazard
2
if inhaled in concentrated doses. Gases such as hydrogen chloride (HCI) from
solid propellants using a perchlorate oxidizer (see Ref. 18-11), nitrogen dioxide
(N0 2), nitrogen tetroxide (N 20 4), or vapors of nitric acid (HN0 3) have rela
tively low levels of allowable inhalation concentration before health damage
can occur. Chapter 7 lists some of the safe exposure limits. The potential
damage increases with the concentration of the toxic species in the exhaust,
the mass flow or thrust level, and the duration of the rocket firing at or near the
test/launch site.
Dispersion by wind and diffusion and dilution with air can reduce the con
centrations of toxic materials to tolerable levels within a few minutes, but this
depends on local weather conditions, as explained in Chapter 20. Careful
attention is therefore given to scheduling the launch or test operations at
times when the wind will carry these gases to nearby uninhabited areas. For
very highly toxic exhaust gases (e.g., those containing beryllium oxide or cer
tain fluorine compounds), and usually for relatively small thrust levels, the
exhaust gases in static test facilities are captured, chemically treated, and pur
ified before release into the atmosphere.
Noise
Acoustical noise is an unavoidable by-product of thrust; it is particularly
important in large launch vehicles and is a primary design consideration in
the vehicle and in much of the ground-support equipment, particularly elec-
654 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
tronic components. Besides being an operational hazard to personnel in and
around rocket-propelled vehicles, it can be a severe annoyance to communities
near rocket test sites. The acoustic power emitted by the Saturn V vehicle at
launch is about 2 x 108 W, enough to light up about 200,000 average homes if
it were available as electricity.
Acoustic energy emission is mainly a function of exhaust velocity, mass of
gas flow, exhaust gas density, and the velocity of sound in the quiescent med
ium. In these terms, the chemical rocket is the noisiest of all aircraft and missile
propulsion devices. Sound intensity is highest near the nozzle exit and
diminishes with the square of the distance from the source. Analytical models
of noise from a rocket exhaust usually divide the plume into two primary areas,
one being upstream of the shock waves and one being downstream (subsonic),
with high-frequency sound coming from the first and low-frequency from the
second. The shock wave itself is a generator of sound, as is the highly turbulent
mixing of the high-velocity exhaust with its reltively quiescent surroundings.
Sound emission is normally measured in terms of microbars (µbar) of sound
pressure, but is also expressed as sound power (W), sound intensity (W/ft2 ), or
sound level (decibels, dB). The relationship that exists among a decibel scale,
the power, and intensity scales is difficult to estimate intuitively since the
decibel is a logarithm of a ratio of two power quantities or two intensity
quantities. Further, expression of a decibel quantity must also be accompanied
by a decibel scale reference, for example, the quantity of watts corresponding
to O dB. In the United States, the most common decibel scale references 10-13
W power, whereas the European scale references 10-12 W.
A large rocket can generate a sound level of about 200 dB (reference 10-13
W), corresponding to 107 W of sound power, compared to 140 dB for a 75-
piece orchestra generating 10 W. Reducing the sound power by 50% reduces
the value by only about 3 dB. In terms of human sensitivity, a 10-dB change
usually doubles or halves the noise for the average person. Sound levels above
140 dB frequently introduce pain to the ear and levels above 160 become
intolerable (see Ref. 18-12).
Spacecraft Surface Contamination
Contamination of sensitive surfaces of a spacecraft by rocket exhaust products
can be a problem to vehicle designers and users. It can degrade functional
surfaces, such as solar cells, optical lenses, radiators, windows, thermal-control
coatings, and mirrored surfaces. Propellants that have condensed liquids or
solid particles in their exhaust appear to be more troublesome than propellants
with mostly gaseous products, such as oxygen-hydrogen. Plumes from most
solid propellant contain contaminating species. Practically all the investigative
work has been concerned with small storable liquid propellant attitude control
pulse motors in the thrust range 1.0 to 500 N, the type commonly used for
controlling vehicle attitude and orbit positioning over long periods of time.
Deposits of hydrazinium nitrate and other material have been found. The
18.2. PLUME EFFECTS 655
accumulation of exhaust products on surfaces in the vicinity is a function of
many variables, including the propellants, combustion efficiency, combustion
pressure, nozzle expansion ratio, surface temperature, and rocket-vehicle inter
face geometries. The prediction of exhaust contamination of spacecraft sur
faces is only partly possible through analytical calculations. Reference 18-13
provides a comprehensive analytical model and computer program for liquid
bipropellant rockets.
Another effect of clouds of condensed species (either tiny liquid droplets or
solid particles) is to scatter sunlight and cause solar radiation to be diverted to
optical instruments on the spacecraft, such as cameras, telescopes, IR trackers,
or star trackers; this effect can cause erroneous instrument measurements. The
scatter depends on the plume location relative to the instruments, the propel
lant, the density and size of particulates, the sensitive optical frequency, and the
surface temperature of the instrument.
Radio Signal Attenuation
All rocket exhaust plumes generally interfere with the transmission of radio
frequency signals that must pass through the plume in the process of guiding
the vehicle, radar detecting, or communicating with it. Solid propellant exhaust
plumes usually cause more interference than liquid rocket engine plumes.
Signal attenuation is a function of free electron density and electron collision
frequency. Given these two parameters for the entire plume, the amount of
attenuation a signal experiences in passing through the plume can be calcu
lated. Figure 18-8 shows the minimum plume model sufficient for predicting
signal attenuation that contains contours of constant electron density and
electron collision frequency for momentum transfer. Free-electron density
Exhaust nozzle
Electron density
contours, electrons/cm3
FIGURE 18-8. Exhaust plume model for predicting attenuation of radio communica
tions signals. The contours shown are for either equal electron density or electron
collision frequency; the highest values are near the nozzle exit.
656 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
and activity in the exhaust plume are influenced by many factors, including the
propellant formulation, propellant alkali impurities, exhaust temperature,
motor size, chamber pressure, flight speed and altitude, and the distance down
stream from the nozzle exit. Methods have been developed for analyzing (with
computers) the physical and chemical composition, including electron density,
and the attenuation characteristics of exhaust plumes (Refs. 18-14 and 18-15).
The relationship between several influential motor and vehicle design factors
can be summarized from experience with typical solid propellant rockets as
follows:
I. The presence of alkali metal impurities increases attenuation; changing
the impurity level of potassium from 10 to 100 ppm increases the relative
attenuation some I 0-fold at low altitude. Both potassium ( ~ 150 ppm)
and sodium ( ~ 50 ppm) are impurities in commercial grade nitrocellulose
and ammonium perchlorate.
2. The percentage of aluminum fuel is a major influence; increasing the
percentage from 10 to 20% increases the attenuation fivefold at sea
level and three- to fourfold at 7500 m altitude.
3. Increasing the chamber pressure for a given aluminized propellant from
100 to 2000 psi reduces the relative attenuation by about 50%.
4. Attenuation varies with the distance downstream from the nozzle exit
plane and can be four to five times as great as at the nozzle exit plane,
depending on the flight altitude, nozzle geometry, oxidizer-to-fuel ratio,
flight velocity, altitude, and other parameters.
For many solid rocket applications, attenuation of radio or radar signal
strength by the exhaust plume is no problem. When it is, attenuation can
usually be kept at acceptable levels by controlling the level of alkali impurities
in propellant ingredients and by using nonmetal fuels or a low percentage
( < 5%) of aluminum. Motors with high expansion ratio nozzles help, since
electrons combine with the positive ions as the exhaust temperature falls.
The electrons in the plume greatly increase its radar cross section, and hot
plumes can readily be picked up with radar. The plume is usually a stronger
radar reflector than the flight vehicle. A radar homing missile seeker would
focus on the plume and not the vehicle. A reduction of the plume cross section
is desirable (lower gas temperature, less sodium impurities).
Plume Impingement
In most reaction control systems there are many small thrusters and they are
pointed in different directions. There have been cases where the plumes of some
of these thrusters have impinged upon a space vehicle surface, such as extended
solar cell panels, radiation heat rejection surfaces, or aerodynamic control
surfaces. This is more likely to happen at high altitude, where the plume
18.3. ANALYSIS AND MATHEMATICAL SIMULATION 657
diameters are large. This can lead to the overheating of these surfaces and to
unexpected turning moments.
Also, during stage separation, there have been occasions where the plume of
the upper stage impinges on the lower vehicle stage. This can cause overheating
and impact damage not only to the lower stage (being separated), but by
reflection also to the upper stage. Other examples are docking maneuvers or
the launching of multiple rockets (nearly simultaneously) from a military bar
rage launcher. The plume of one of the rocket missiles impinges on another
flying missile and causes it to experience a change in flight path, often not
hitting the intended target.
18.3. ANALYSIS AND MATHEMATICAL SIMULATION
The complicated structure, the behavior, and many of the physical phenomena
of plumes have been simulated by mathematical algorithms, and a number of
relatively complex computer programs exist (see Refs. 18-16 to 18-20).
Although there has been remarkable progress in using mathematical simula
tions of plume phenomena, the results of such computer analyses are not
always reliable or useful for making predictions of many of the plume char
acteristics; however, the models help in understanding the plumes and in ex
trapolating test results to different conditions within narrow limits. There are
some physical phenomena in plumes that are not yet fully understood.
All simulations are really approximations, to various degrees; they require
simplifying assumptions to make a reasonable mathematical solution possible,
and their field of application is usually limited. They are aimed at predicting
different plume parameters, such as temperature or velocity or pressure pro
files, radar cross section, heat transfer, radiations, condensation, deposits on
optical surfaces, impact forces, or chemical species. The analyses are usually
limited to separate spatial segments of the plume (e.g., core, mantle, supersonic
versus subsonic regions, continuum versus free molecular flow, near or far
field), and many have different assumptions about the dynamics or steadiness
of the flow (many neglect turbulence effects or the interaction between bound
ary layers and shock waves). The algorithms are also different in the treatment
of chemical reactions, solids content, energy releases, composition changes
within the plume, different flight and altitude regimes, the interactions with
the airflow and the vehicle, or selected regions of the spectrum (e.g., IR only).
Many require assumptions about particle sizes, their amounts, spatial and size
distribution, gas velocity distribution, the geometry and boundaries of the
mixing layer, or the turbulence behavior. The mathematical models are com
plex and can use one-, two-, or three-dimensional mesh models. The analysis of
a plume often requires using more than one model to solve for different pre
dictions. Many solutions are based in part on extrapolating measured data
from actual plumes to guide the analyses. The specific analytical approaches
658 ROCKET EXHAUST PLUMES
are beyond the scope of this book and their mathematical resolutions are the
domain of experts in this field.
The actual measurements on plumes during static and flight tests are used to
verify the theories and they require highly specialized instrumentation, careful
calibrations and characterization, skilled personnel, and an intelligent applica
tion of various correction factors. Extrapolating the computer programs to
reg10ns or parameters that have not been validated has often given poor
results.
PROBLEMS
1. List at least two parameters that are likely to increase total radiation emission from
plumes, and explain how they accomplish this. For example, increasing the thrust
increases the radiating mass of the plume.
2. Look up the term chemiluminescence in a technical dictionary or chemical encyclo
pedia; provide a definition and explain how it can affect plume radiation.
3. If a high-altitude plume is seen from a high-altitude balloon, its apparent radiation
intensity diminishes with the square of the distance between the plume and the
observation platform and as the cosine of the angle of the flight path tangent with
the line to the observation station. Establish your own trajectory and its relative
location to the observation station. For a plume of an ascending launch vehicle,
make a rough estimate of the change in the relative intensity received by the ob
serving sensor during flight. Neglect atmospheric absorption of plume radiation and
assume that the intensity of emitted radiation stays constant.
REFERENCES
18-1. S. M. Dash, "Analysis of Exhaust Plumes and their Interaction with Missile
Airframes," in M. J. Hemsch and J. N. Nielson (Eds.), Tactical Missile
Aerodynamics, Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 104, AIAA,
Washington, DC, 1986.
18-2. S. M. Yahya, Fundamentals of" Compressible Flow, 2nd revised printing, Wiley
Eastern Limited, New Delhi, 1986.
18-3. R. D. McGregor, P. D. Lohn, and D. E. Haflinger, "Plume Impingement Study
for Reaction Control Systems of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle," AJAA
Paper 90-1708, June 1990.
18-4. P. D. Lohn, D. E. Halfinger, R. D. McGregor, and H. W. Behrens, "Modeling
of Near-Continuum Flows using Direct Simulation Monte Carlo Method,"
AIAA Paper 90-1663, June 1990.
18-5. F. S. Simmons, Rocket Exhaust Plume Phenomenology, Aerospace Press, The
Aerospace Corporation, 2000.
REFERENCES 659
18-6. A. V. Rodionov, Yu A. Plastinin, J. A. Drakes, M.A. Simmons, and R. S. Hiers
III, "Modeling of Multiphase Alumina-Loaded Jet Flow Fields," A/AA Paper
98-3462, July 1998.
18-7. R. B. Lyons, J. Wormhoudt, and C. E. Kolb, "Calculation of Visible Radiations
from Missile Plumes," in Spacecraft Radiative Heat Transfer and Temperature
Control, Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 83, AIAA, Washington,
DC, June 1981, pp. 128-148.
18-8. A. C. Victor, "Solid Rocket Plumes," Chapter 8 of: G. E. Jensen and D. W.
Netzer (Eds.), Tactical Missile Propulsion, Progress in Astronautics and
Aeronautics, Vol. 170, AIAA, 1996.
18-9. Rocket Motor Plume Technology, AGARD Lecture Series 188, NATO, June
1993.
18-10. Terminology and Assessment Methods of Solid Propellant Rocket Exhaust
Signatures, AGARD Advisory Report 287, NATO, February 1993.
18-11. D. I. Sebacher, R. J. Bendura, and G. L. Gregory, "Hydrogen Chloride
Measurements in the Space Shuttle Exhaust Cloud," Journal of Spacecraft
and Rockets, Vol. 19, No. 4, July-August 1982.
18-12. J. M. Seiner, S. M. Dash, and D. E. Wolf, "Analysis of Turbulent
Underexpanded Jets, Part II: Shock Noise Features Using SCIPVIS," A/AA
Journal, Vol. 23, No. 5, May 1985, pp. 669-677.
18-13. R. J. Hoffman, W. D. English, R. G. Oeding, and W. T. Webber, "Plume
Contamination Effects Prediction,'' Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory,
December 1971.
18-14. L. D. Smoot and D. L. Underwood, "Prediction of Microwave Attenuation
Characteristics of Rocket Exhausts," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol.
3, No. 3, March 1966, pp. 302-309.
18-15. W. A. Wood and J. R. De More, "Microwave Attenuation Characteristics of
Solid Propellant Exhaust Products," A/AA Paper 65-183, February 1965.
18-16. I. Boyd, "Modeling of Satellite Control Thruster Plumes," PhD thesis,
Southampton University, England, 1988.
18-17. S. M. Dash and D. E. Wolf, "Interactive Phenomena in Supersonic Jet Mixing
Plumes, Part I: Phenomenology and Numerical Modeling Technique," A/AA
Journal, Vol. 22, No. 7, July 1984, pp. 905-913.
18-18. S. M. Dash, D. E. Wolf, R. A. Beddini, and H. S. Pergament, "Analysis of Two
Phase Flow Processes in Rocket Exhaust Plumes," Journal of Spacecraft, Vol.
22, No. 3, May-June 1985, pp. 367-380.
18-19. C. B. Ludwig, W. Malkmus, G. N. Freemen, M. Slack, and R. Reed, "A
Theoretical Model for Absorbing, Emitting and Scattering Plume
Radiations," in Spacecraft Radiative Transfer and Temperature Control,
Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 83, AIAA, Washington, DC,
1981, pp. 111-127.
18-20. S. M. Dash, "Recent Developments in the Modeling of High Speed Jets, Plumes
and Wakes," A/AA Paper 85-1616, presented at AIAA 18th Fluid Dynamics
Plasma-Dynamics and Laser Conference, July 1985.
CHAPTER 19
ELECTRIC PROPULSION
As mentioned in Chapters 1 and 2, electric rocket propulsion devices use
electrical energy for heating and/or directly ejecting propellant, utilizing an
energy source that is independent of the propellant itself. The purpose of
this chapter is to provide an introduction to this field. Vector notation is
used in several of the background equations presented.
The basic subsystems of a typical electric propulsion thruster are: (I) a raw
energy source such as solar or nuclear energy with its auxiliaries such as con
centrators, heat conductors, pumps, panels, radiators, and/or controls; (2)
conversion devices to transform this energy into electrical form at the proper
voltage, frequency, pulse rate, and current suitable for the electrical propulsion
system; (3) a propellant system for storing, metering, and delivering the pro
pellant; and (4) one or more thrusters to convert the electric energy into kinetic
energy of the exhaust. The term thruster is commonly used here, as thrust
chamber is in liquid propellant rockets.
Electric propulsion is unique in that it includes both thermal and non-ther
mal systems as classified in Chapter I. Also, since the energy source is divorced
from the propellant, the choice of propellant is guided by factors much differ
ent to those in chemical propulsion. In Chapter 3, ideal relations that apply to
all thermal thrusters are developed which are also relevant to thermal-electric
(or electrothermal) systems. Concepts and equations for non-thermal-electric
systems are defined in this chapter. From among the many ideas and designs of
electric propulsion devices reported to date, one can distinguish the following
three fundamental types:
660
ELECTRIC PROPULSION 661
I. Electrothermal. Propellant is heated electrically and expanded thermody
namically; i.e., the gas is accelerated to supersonic speeds through a
nozzle, as in the chemical rocket.
2. Electrostatic. Acceleration is achieved by the interaction of electrostatic
fields on non-neutral or charged propellant particles such as atomic ions,
droplets, or colloids.
3. Electromagnetic. Acceleration is achieved by the interaction of electric
and magnetic fields within a plasma. Moderately dense plasmas are high
temperature or nonequilibrium gases, electrically neutral and reasonably
good conductors of electricity.
A general description of these three types was given in Chapter 1, Figs. 1-8 to
1-10. Figure 19-1 and Tables 2-1 and 19-1 show power and performance
values for several types of electric propulsion units. Note that the thrust levels
are small relative to those of chemical and nuclear rockets, but that values of
specific impulse can be substantially higher; the latter may translate into a
longer operational life for satellites whose life is presently propellant limited.
Inherently, electric thrusters give accelerations too low for overcoming the
high-gravity field of earth launches. They function best in space, which also
Regions of mission utility
ITTlTTl GEO N.S. Stationkeeping/
UilW drag makeup
~ Orbit maneuvering/adjustment
ffi
1000.0 Solar power orbit transfer
MPDs
II
(magneto
Nuclear power orbit transfer
plasma
~ dynamic)
,.: 100.0
Q)
~ Arc jets
a.
"O
~ Hall
0§. 10.0 effect thrusters
aQ:) Resistojets
Ion engines
1.0
UJ.W-lJl-l.+-+++cfttttt---PPT (pulsed plasma thrusters)
500 1000 5000 10,000
Specific impulse, sec
FIGURE 19-1. Overview of the approximate regions of application of different elec
trical propulsion systems in terms of power and specific impulse.
O>
O>
II,)
TABLE 19-1. Typical Performance Parameters of Various Types of Electrical Propulsion Systems
Thrust Specific Thruster Kinetic Power
Range Impulse Efficiencl Thrust Typical per Unit Thrust
Type (mN) (sec) (%) Duration Propellants (W/mN)
Resistojet (thermal) 200-300 200-350 65-90 Months NH ,N H4,H2 0.5-6
3 2
Arcjet (thermal) 200-1000 400-1000 30-50 Months H 2,N2,N 2H 4,NH
3
2-3
Ion engine 0.01-200 1500-5000 60-80 Months Xe,Kr,Ar 10-70
Solid pulsed plasma (PPT) 0.05-10 600-2000 10 Years Teflon 10-50
Magnetoplasma dynamic (MPD) 0.001-2000 2000-5000 30-50 Weeks Ar,Xe,H ,Li 100
2
Hall thruster 0.01-2000 1500-2000 30-50 Months Xe,Ar 100
Monopropellant rocketa 30-100,000 200-250 87-97 Hours or N2H4
minutes
"Listed for comparison only.
hSee Eq. 19-3.
ELECTRIC PROPULSION 663
matches the near-vacuum exhaust pressures required of electrostatic and elec
tromagnetic systems. All flight missions envisioned with electric propulsion
operate in a reduced-gravity or gravity-free space and, therefore, must be
launched from earth by chemical rocket systems.
The many advantages of electric propulsion had been offset by their
required use of substantial quantities of electricity which, at certain power
levels, had been an expensive commodity in space until recently. All types of
electric propulsion presently depend on a vehicle-borne power source~based
on solar, chemical, or nuclear energy~and power conversion and conditioning
equipment. The mass of the electric generating equipment, even when solar
energy is employed, can become much larger than that of the thrusters, parti
cularly when thruster efficiency is low. This causes appreciable increases in
inert-vehicle mass (or dry-mass). Modern satellites and other spacecraft have
substantial communications requirements. Typically these satellites can share
their electrical power sources, thus avoiding the penalty to the propulsion
system. What remains to be tagged to the propulsion system is the power
conditioning equipment, except in instances where it is also shared with
other spacecraft components.
Electric propulsion has been considered for space applications since the
inception of the space program in the 1950s but has only begun to make
widespread impact since the mid-l 990s. This is a result of the availability of
sufficiently large amounts of electrical power in spacecraft. References 19-I to
19-3 are devoted to electric propulsion. Basic principles on electric propulsion
devices are given in these references, along with applications, although the
information relates to older versions of such devices. Table 19-2 gives a com
parison of advantages and disadvantages of several types of electric propul
sion. Pulsed devices differ from continuous or steady-state in that startup and
shutdown transients may degrade their effective performance. Pulsed devices,
however, are of practical importance, as is detailed later in this chapter.
The applications for electric propulsion fall into several broad mission cate
gories (these have already been introduced in Chapter 4):
(I) Overcoming translational and rotational perturbations in satellite orbits,
such as north-south station keeping (NSSK) of satellites in geosynchro
nous orbits (GEO) or aligning telescopes or antennas or drag compen
sation of satellites in low (LEO) and medium earth orbits (MEO). For a
typical north-south station-keeping task in a 350-km orbit, a velocity
increment of about 50 m/sec every year or 500 m/sec for IO years might
be needed. Several different electric propulsion systems have actually
flown in this type of mission.
(2) Increasing satellite speed while overcoming the relatively weak gravita
tional field some distance away from the earth, such as orbit raising from
a low earth orbit (LEO) to a higher orbit or even to a geosynchronous
orbit (GEO). Circularizing an elliptical orbit may require 2000 m/sec
and going from LEO to GEO typically might require a velocity increase
664 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
TABLE 19-2. Comparison of Electrical Propulsion Systems
Type Advantages Disadvantages Comments
Resistojet Simple device; easy to Lowest !,; heat loss; Operational
(electro thermal) control; simple power gas dissociation;
conditioning; low cost; indirect heating of
relatively high thrust gas; erosion
and efficiency; can use
many propellants,
including hydrazine
augmentation
Arcjet Direct heating of gas; Low efficiency; erosion High-thrust
(electrothermal low voltage; relatively at high power; low I,; units need Pe
& electromagnetic) simple device; relatively high current; heavy of 100 kW
high thrust; can use wiring; heat loss; more or more.
catalytic hydrazine complex power Operational
augmentation; inert conditioning
propellant
Ion propulsion High specific impulse; Complex power Flown in
( electrostatic) high efficiency; inert conditioning; high satellites
propellant (xenon) voltages; single (OSI)
propellant only; low
thrust per unit area;
heavy power supply
Pulsed plasma Simple device; low Low thrust; Teflon Operational
(PPT) power; solid reaction products are
(e lectromagnetic) propellant; no gas or toxic, may be corrosive
liquid feed system; no or condensable;
zero-g effects on inefficient
propellant
MPD Can be relatively simple; Difficult to simulate Several have
Steady-state plasma high !,; high thrust analytically; high flown
(electromagnetic) per unit area specific power; heavy
power supply
Hall thruster Desirable I, range; Single propellant; high Operational
(electromagnetic) compact, relatively beam divergence;
simple power erosion
conditioning; inert
propellant (Xe)
of up to 6000 m/sec. Several electric propulsion units are being devel
oped for these types of mission.
(3) Potential missions such as interplanetary travel and deep space probes are
also candidates for electric propulsion. A return to the moon, missions
to Mars, Jupiter, and missions to comets and asteroids are of present
interest. These all require relatively high thrust and power. A few electric
thrusters for this category of missions (I 00 kW) are being investigated.
The power supply for these missions may require other than solar
power; nuclear sources need to be considered.
As an illustration of the benefit in applying electric propulsion, consider a
typical geosynchronous communications satellite with a 15-year lifetime and
ELECTRIC PROPULSION 665
with a mass of 2600 kg. For north-south station-keeping (NSSK) the satellite
might need an annual velocity increase of some 50 m/sec; this requires about
750 kg of chemical propellant for the entire period, which is more than one
quarter of the satellite mass. Using an electric propulsion system can increase
the specific impulse to 2800 sec (about nines times higher than a chemical
rocket), and the propellant mass can be reduced to perhaps less than 100 kg.
A power supply and electric thrusters would have to be added, but the inert
mass of the chemical system can be deleted. Such an electric system would save
perhaps 450 kg or about 18% of the satellite mass. At launch costs of $30,000
per kilogram delivered to GEO, this is a potential saving of some $13,500,000
per satellite. Alternatively, more propellant could be stored in the satellite, thus
extending its useful life. Additional savings could materialize if electric propul
sion were also used for orbit raising.
The power output (kinetic energy of jet per unit time, P or Pict) is really
the basic energy rate supplied by the power source, principally diminished by
(I) the losses of the power conversion, such as from solar into electrical
energy; (2) conversion into the forms of electric energy suitable for the thrus
ters; and (3) the losses of the conversion of electric energy into propulsive jet
energy. The kinetic power of the jet P per unit thrust F can be expressed by
the simple relation (assuming no significant pressure thrust)
P/F = 2I m· v2 / m· v = 2I v = 2I go I s (19-1)
m
where is the mass flow rate, v the average jet discharge velocity (v or c in
2
Chapters 2 and 3), and I, the specific impulse. The power-to-thrust ratio of the
jet is therefore proportional to the exhaust velocity or the specific impulse.
Thus, electrical propulsion units with very substantial values of (. require
more power per unit of thrust and incidentally a more massive power supply.
Thruster efficiency 77 is defined as the ratio of the thrust-producing kinetic
1
energy (axial component) rate of the exhaust beam to the total electrical power
supplied to the thruster, including any used in evaporating or ionizing the
pro pell ant, or
power of the jet Pjet
'f/1= =-- (19-2)
electrical power input '£(IV)
Then, from the fundamentals in Chapter 2 (Eqs. 2-19 and 2-22),
'f/12I m =· v2
-
-=FI.,
-
g
-0 =
FI., g
0 (19-3)
Pe 2Pe 2'£(IV)
with Pe the electric power input to the thruster in watts, usually the product of
the electrical current and all associated voltages (hence the '£-sign).
666 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
Thruster efficiency accounts for all the energy losses that do not result in
kinetic energy, including (I) the wasted electrical power (stay currents, ohmic
resistance, etc.); (2) unaffected or improperly activated propellant particles
(propellant utilization); (3) loss of thrust resulting from dispersion of the
exhaust (direction and magnitude); and (4) heat losses. It is a measure of
how effectively electric power and propellant are used in the production of
thrust.
When electrical energy is not the only input energy, Eq. 19-2 has to be
modified; for example, the propellant may release energy (chemical monopro
pellant), as in hydrazine decomposition with a resistojet.
19.1. IDEAL FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
For the low thrust of electric propulsion with its relatively massive power
generating systems, the flight regimes of space vehicles propelled by electric
rockets are quite different from those using chemical rockets. Accelerations
tend to be very low 00-4 to 10-6 go), thrusting times are typically long (several
months), and spiral trajectories were originally suggested for spacecraft accel
erated by these low thrusts. Figure 19-2 shows schemes for going from LEO to
GEO including a spiral, a Hohman ellipse (see Section 4.5 on the Hohman
Chemical propulsion
high thrust trajectory
Subs\uent elliptical orbits
(Hohman ellipse)
Final earth orbit
I Initial earth
orbit (LEO)
Initial super
synchronous orbit
FIGURE 19-2. Simplified diagram of trajectories going from a low earth orbit (LEO)
to a high earth orbit using chemical propulsion (short duration), electric propulsion with
a multiple spiral trajectory (long duration), and a supersynchronous chemical orbit
approach as an alternate to LEO (intermediate duration). From the supersynchronous
orbit continuous thrusting with electric propulsion at a fixed inertial attitude lowers the
apogee and raises the perigee in each orbit until it reaches the final high circular orbit.
See Ref. 19~.
19.1. IDEAL FLIGHT PERFORMANCE 667
orbit, which is optimum for chemical propulsion) as well as a "supersynchro
nous" orbit transfer (Ref. 19-4). Because of the long transfer orbit durations,
trajectories other than spiral are presently being considered where one utilizes
chemical propulsion to arrive at a very eccentric, supersynchronous elliptical
orbit; from there electric propulsion can continuously and effectively be fired to
attain a GEO orbit.
The performance of an electrical rocket can be conveniently analyzed in
terms of the power and the relevant masses (Ref. 19-5). Let m be the total
0
initial mass of the vehicle stage, mp the total mass of the propellant to be
expelled, mp! the payload mass to be carried by the particular stage under
consideration, and mPP the mass of the power plant consisting of the empty
propulsion system including the thruster, propellant storage and feed system,
the energy source with its conversion system and auxiliaries, and the associated
structure. Then
(19--4)
The energy source input to the power supply (i.e., solar or nuclear) has to be
larger than its electrical power output; they are related by the power conversion
efficiency (about 10 to 15% for photovoltaic and up to 30% for rotating
machinery) for converting the raw energy into electrical power at the desired
voltages, frequencies, and power levels. The converted electrical output Pe is
then supplied to the propulsion system. The ratio of the electrical power Pe to
the mass of the power plant mPP is defined as a, which is often referred to as the
specific power of the power plant or of the entire propulsion system. This
specific power must be defined for each design, because even for the same
type of engine, a is somewhat dependent on the engine-module configuration
(this includes the number of engines that share the same power conditioner,
redundancies, valving, etc.):
(19-5)
The specific power is considered to be proportional to engine-power and rea
sonably independent of mr Its value hinges on technological advances and the
electric-propulsion engine module configuration. Presently, typical values of a
range between 100 and 200 W/kg. In the future it is hoped that a will attain
values of 500 to 2000 W/kg pending some breakthrough in power conditioning
equipment. Electrical power is converted by the thruster into kinetic energy of
the exhaust. Allowing for losses by using the thruster efficiency 17 defined in
1,
Eqs. 19-2 and 19-3, the electric power input is
668 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
where mp is the propellant mass, v the effective exhaust velocity, and tp the time
of operation or propulsive time when the propellant is being ejected at a uni
form rate.
Using Eqs. 19-4, 19-5, and 19-6 together with 4-7, one can obtain a rela
tion for the reciprocal payload mass fraction (see Problem 19-4)
(19-7)
This assumes a gravity-free and drag-free flight. The change of vehicle velocity
t:.u which results from the propellant being exhausted at a speed vis plotted in
Fig. 19-3 as a function of propellant mass fraction. The specific power a and
the thruster efficiency T/r as well as the propulsive time tP can be combined into
a characteristic speed (Ref. 19-5)
(19-8)
This characteristic speed is not a physical speed but rather a defined grouping
of parameters that has units of speed; it can be visualized as the speed the
power plant would have if its full power output were converted into the form of
kinetic energy of its own inert mass mpp· Equation 19-8 includes the propulsive
time tP which is the actual mission time (certainly, mission time cannot be
smaller than the thrusting time). From Fig. 19-3 it can be seen that, for a
given payload fraction (mpi/m 0) and characteristic speed (vc), there is an opti-
0.8
Payload
0.6 fraction
i\u mp,lm 0
Ve
0.00
0.4
0.25
0.35
0.45
0.2 0.55
0.65
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
FIGURE 19-3. Normalized vehicle velocity increment as a function of normalized
exhaust velocity for various payload fractions with zero inert mass of the propellant
tank. The optima of each curve are connected by a line that represents Eq. 19-9.
19.1. IDEAL FLIGHT PERFORMANCE 669
mum value of v corresponding to the peak vehicle velocity increment; this is
later shown to signify that there exists a particular set of most desirable oper
ating conditions.
The peak for the curves in Fig. 19-3 exists because the inert mass of the
power plant mPP increases with the specific impulse while the propellant
mass decreases with specific impulse. For a constant flow rate, other com
ponents are fixed in mass so that they only displace the curves by a con
stant amount. As indicated in Chapter 17 and elsewhere, this trend is
generally true for all propulsion systems and leads to the statement that,
for a given mission, there is theoretically an optimum range of spec[fic
impulse and thus an optimum propulsion system design. The peak of each
curve in Fig. 19-3 is nicely bracketed by the ranges t,.,.u/v, ::; 0.805 and
0.505 .'.S v/ve .'.S 1.0. This means that for any given electric engine any opti
t;
mum operating time will be proportional to the square of the total
required change in vehicle velocity and thus large f',,,.u's would correspond
to very long mission times. Similarly, any optimum specific impulse 1_; will
be (nearly) proportional to the change in vehicle velocity and large changes
here would necessitate correspondingly high specific impulses. These con
clusions will be refined in Section 19.4.
The optimum of the curves in Fig. 19-3 can be found by differentiating Eq.
19-7
(19-9)
This relates t,.,.u, v, and ve for maximum payload fraction (see Ref. 19-1).
All the equations quoted so far apply to all three fundamental types of
electric rocket systems. No engine parameters are necessary except for the
overall efficiency, which ranges from 0.4 to 0.8 in well-designed electric propul
sion units, and a, which varies more broadly.
The problem with the above formulation is that the equations are under
constrained in that, given a velocity increment, mission time and specific
impulse can be independently assigned. We will return to this topic in
Section 19.4.
Example 19-1. Determine the flight characteristics of an electrical propulsion rocket
for raising a low satellite orbit. Data given:
/5 = 2000 sec
F= 0.20 N
Duration = 4 weeks = 2.42 x 106 sec
Payload mass = I 00 kg
a= 100 W/kg
=
Y/1 0.5
670 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
SOLUTION. The propellant flow is, from Eq. 2-13,
m= F /(! 5g 0) = 0.2/(2000 x 9.81) = 1.02 x 10-5kg/sec
The total required propellant is
mp =mt= 1.02 X 10-5 X 2.42 X 106 = 24.69 kg
The required electrical power is, from Eq. 19-6,
Pe = !mv2 /-1/1 = 1(1.02 X 10-5 X 20002 X 9.812)/0.5 = 3.92 kW
The mass of the propulsion system and energy supply system is, from Eq. 19-5,
mPP =Pe/a= 3.92/0.1 = 39.2 kg
The mass before and after engine operation (see Eq. 19-4) is
m = 100 + 24.7 + 39.2 = 163.9 kg
1
m = 139.2 kg
2
The velocity increase of the stage under ideal vacuum and zero-g conditions (Eq. 4-6) is
6.u = v ln[m0/(m0 - mp)]
= =
2000 x 9.8 ln(l63.9/139.2) 3200 m/sec
The average acceleration of the vehicle is
a= 6.u/ t = 3200/2.42 x 106 = 1.32 x 10-3m/sec2
= J.35 X 10-4go
The flight's energy increase after 4 weeks of continuous thrust-producing operation is
not enough to get from LEO to GEO (which would have required a change of vehicle
velocity of about 4700 m/sec with continuous low thrust). During its travel the satellite
will have made about 158 revolutions around the earth and raised the orbit by about
13,000 km. Moreover, this does not represent an optimum. In order to satisfy Eq. 19-9
it would be necessary to increase the burn duration (operating time) or change the
thrust, or both.
19.2. ELECTROTHERMAL THRUSTERS
In this category, the electric energy is used to heat the propellant, which is then
thermodynamically expanded through a nozzle. There are two basic types in
use today:
19.2. ELECTROTHERMAL THRUSTERS 671
1. The resistojet, in which components with high electrical resistance dis
sipate power and in turn heat the propellant, largely by convection.
2. The arcjet, in which current flows through the bulk of the propellant gas
which has been ionized in an electrical discharge. Being relatively devoid
of material limitations, this method introduces more heat directly into the
gas (it can reach local temperatures of 20,000 K or more). The electro
thermal arcjet is a unit where magnetic fields (either external or self
induced by the current) are not as essential for producing thrust as is
the nozzle. As shown in Section 19.4, arcjets can also operate as electro
magnetic thrusters, but here the magnetic fields are essential for accel
eration and propellant densities are much lower. Thus, there are some
arc-thruster configurations that could be classified as both electrother
mal and electromagnetic.
Resistojets
These devices are the simplest type of electrical thruster because the technology
is based on conventional conduction, convection, and radiation heat exchange.
The propellant is heated by flowing over an ohmically heated refractory-metal
surface, such as (I) coils of heated wire, (2) through heated hollow tubes, (3)
over heated knife blades, and (4) over heated cyclinders. Power requirements
range between I W and several kilowatts; a broad range of terminal voltages,
AC or DC, can be designed for, and there are no special requirements for
power conditioning. Thrust can be steady or intermittent as programmed in
the propellant flow.
Material limitations presently cap the operating temperatures to under 2700
K, yielding maximum specific impulses of about 300 sec. The highest specific
impulse has been achieved with hydrogen (because of its lowest molecular
mass), but its low density causes propellant storage to be bulky (cryogenic
storage being unrealistic for space missions). Since virtually any propellant is
appropriate, a large variety of different gases has been used, such as 0 2, H 20,
CO 2, NH 3, CH 4, and N 2. Also, hot gases resulting from the catalytic decom
position of hydrazine (which produces approximately 1 volume of NH and 2
3
volumes of H [see Chapter 7]) have been successfully operated. The system
2
using liquid hydrazine (Ref. 19-6) has the advantage of being compact and the
catalytic decomposition preheats the mixed gases to about 700°C (1400°F)
prior to their being heated electrically to an even higher temperature; this
reduces the required electric power while taking advantage of a well-proven
space chemical propulsion concept. Figure 19-4 shows details of such a hybrid
resistojet which is fed downstream from a catalyst bed where hydrazine is
decomposed into hot gases.
Resistojets have been proposed for manned long-duration deep space mis
sions, where the spacecraft's waste products (e.g., H 20 or CO 2) could then be
672 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
~ Propellant inlet
tl
r- Fluid
resistor
Heat shield
Heat exchanger
outer body
Heat exchanger
inner body
Spiral wrapped
Electric radiation
wire to shields
valve and Rad1at1on
heaters shield disks
Valve
heater
Valve mounting plate
Thermal shunt
Injector plate
Catalyst bed heater
Gas generator chamber
(filled with catalyst pellets} Augmentation
Gas delivery tube heater element
FIGURE 19-4. Resistojet augmented by hot gas from catalytically decomposed hydra
zine; two main assemblies are present: (I) a small catalyst bed with its electromagneti
cally operated propellant valve and heaters to prevent hydrazine from freezing, and (2)
an electrical resistance spiral-shaped heater surrounded by thin radiation shields, a
refractory metal exhaust nozzle, and high-temperature electrical insulation supporting
the power leads. (Courtesy of PRIM EX Aerospace Company.)
used as propellants. Unlike the ion engine and the Hall thruster, the same
resistojet design can be used with different propellants.
In common with nearly all electric propulsion systems, resistojets have a
propellant feed system that has to supply either gas from high-pressure storage
tank or liquid under zero gravity conditions. Liquids require positive tank
expulsion mechanisms, which are discussed in Chapter 6, and pure hydrazine
needs heaters to keep it from freezing.
Engineering considerations in the development of these rockets include
intermittent heat transfer from the heating element to the propellant, conduc
tion and radiation losses from the chamber, the capability of materials to
withstand the hot environment, and the heat capacity of the propellant.
Procedures have been developed to account for specific heat, thermal conduc
tivity, dissociation, and gas density variations with temperature. The gas flow
in the heating chamber is typically considered to be either laminar or vortex
flow, and the heat transfer to the stream is by convection.
Available materials limit the maximum gas temperature of a resistojet.
High-temperature materials used for the resistance element include rhenium
and refractory metals and their alloys (e.g., tungsten, tantalum, molybdenum),
19.2. ELECTROTHERMAL THRUSTERS 673
platinum (stabilized with yttrium and zirconia), as well as cermets. For high
temperature electrical (but not thermal) insulation, boron nitride has been used
effectively.
A design objective is to keep heat losses in the chamber at a low level relative
to the power consumed. This can be done by (I) the use of external insulation,
(2) internally located radiation shields, and (3) entrant flow layers or cascades.
Within reason, the mass of insulation and radiation shields should be small
compared to that of the thruster and of the total propulsion system.
The choice of chamber pressure is influenced by several factors. High pres
sures reduce molecular gas dissociation losses in the chamber, increase the rate
of recombination in the exhaust nozzle, improve the heat exchanger perfor
mance, and reduce the size of both the chamber and the nozzle for a given mass
flow rate. However, high pressures cause higher heat transfer losses, higher
stresses on the chamber walls, and can accelerate the rate of nozzle throat
erosion. The lifetime of a resistojet is often dictated by the nozzle throat life.
Good design practice, admittedly a compromise, sets the chamber pressure in
the range of 15 to 200 psi.
Thruster efficiencies of resistojets range between 65 and 85%, depending on
the propellant and the exhaust gas temperature, among other things. The
specific impulse delivered by any given electrothermal design depends primarily
on (1) the molecular mass of the propellant, and (2) the maximum temperature
that the chamber and the nozzle surfaces can tolerate.
Table 19-3 gives typical performance values for a resistojet augmented by
chemical energy release. The specific impulse and thrust increase as the electric
power of the heater is increased. An increase in flow rate (at constant specific
power) results in an actual decrease in performance. The highest specific power
(power over mass flow rate) is achieved at relatively low flow rates, low thrusts,
and modest heater augmentation. At the higher temperatures the dissociation
of molecular gases noticeably reduces the energy that is available for thermo
dynamic expansion.
Even with its comparatively lower value of specific impulse, the resistojet's
superior efficiency contributes to far higher values of thrust/power than any of
its nearest competitors. Additionally, these engines possess the lowest overall
system empty mass since they do not require a power processor and their
plumes are uncharged (thus avoiding the additional equipment that ion engines
require). Resistojets have been recently employed in Intelsat V, Satcom 1-R,
GOMS, Meteor 3-1, Gstar-3, and Iridium spacecraft. They are most attractive
for low to modest levels of mission velocity increments, where power limits,
thrusting times, and plume effects are mission drivers.
Arcjets
The basic elements of an arcjet thruster are shown in Fig. 1-8 where the relative
simplicity of the physical design masks its rather complicated phenomenology.
The arcjet overcomes the gas temperature limitations of the resistojet by the use
674 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
TABLE 19-3. Selected Performance Values of a Typical Resistojet with
Augmentation
Propellant for resistojet Hydrazine liquid, decomposed
by catalysis
Inlet pressure (MPa) 0.689-2.41
Catalyst outlet temperature (K) 1144
Resistojet outlet temperature (K) 1922
Thrust (N) 0.18-0.33
Flow rate (kg/sec) 5.9 X 10-5-1.3 X J0-4
Specific impulse in vacuum (sec) 280-304
Power for heater (W) 350--510
Power for valve (max.) (W) 9
Thruster mass (kg) 0.816
Total impulse (N-sec) 311,000
Number of pulses 500,000
Minimum off-pulse bit (N-sec) 0.002
Status Operational
Source: Data sheet for model MR-501, Primex Aerospace Company.
of an electric arc for direct heating of the propellant stream to temperatures
much higher than the wall temperatures. The arc stretches between the tip of a
central cathode and an anode, which is part of the coaxial nozzle that accel
erates the heated propellant. These electrodes must be electrically insulated
from each other and be able to withstand high temperatures. At the nozzle it
is desirable for the arc to attach itself as a diffuse annulus in the divergent
portion just downstream of the throat. The region of attachment is known to
move up or down depending on the magnitude of the arc voltage and on the
mass flow rate. In reality, arcs are highly filamentary and tend to heat only a
small portion of the flowing gas unless the throat dimension is sufficiently
small; bulk heating is done by mixing, often with the aid of vortex flow and
turbulence. Since not all the heat is released prior to expansion in the nozzle,
there is some loss in that heat released in the divergent portion of the nozzle is
not effective in increasing the Mach number of the flow velocity in the exit
divergent section.
Arcs are inherently unstable, often forming pinches and wiggles; they can be
somewhat stabilized by an external electric field or by swirling vortex motion in
the outer layers of the gas flow. The flow structure at the nozzle throat is quite
nonuniform and arc instabilities and erosion at the throat are very limiting.
The mixing of cooler outer gas with the arc-heated inner gas tends to stabilize
the arc while lowering its conductivity, which in turn requires higher voltages
of operation. In some designs the arc is made longer by lengthening the throat.
The analysis of arcjets is based on plasma physics, as it applies to a moving
ionized fluid. The conduction of electricity through a gas requires that a certain
19.2. ELECTROTHERMAL THRUSTERS 675
level of ionization be present. This ionization must be obtained from an elec
trical discharge, i.e., the breakdown of the cold propellant resembling a light
ning discharge in the atmosphere (but, unlike lightning, a power supply may
feed the current in a continuous or pulsed fashion). Gaseous conductors of
electricity follow a modified version of Ohm's law. In an ordinary uniform
medium where an electrical current I is flowing across an area A through a
distance d by virtue of a voltage drop V, we can write Ohm's law as
V = IR = (I/ A)(AR/ d)(d) (19-10)
As given, the medium is uniform and thus we may define the electric field as
E = V/d, the current density as}= I/A, and we introduce the electrical con
ductivity as a= d/ AR. We can now rewrite the basic Ohm's law as simply
j = aE. The scalar electrical conductivity is directly proportional to the density
of unattached or free electrons that, under equilibrium, may be found from
Saha's equation (Ref. 19-7). Strictly speaking, Saha's equation applies to ther
mal ionization only (and not necessarily to electrical discharges). For most
gases, either high temperatures or low ionization energies or both are required
for plentiful ionization. However, since only about one in a million electrons is
sufficient for good conductivity, an inert gas can be seeded with alkali-metal
vapors, as is amply demonstrated in plasmas for power generation. The value
of plasma electrical conductivity a may be calculated from
(19-11)
Here e is the electron charge, ne the electron number density, r the mean time
between collisions, and µe the electron mass.
Actually, arc currents are nearly always influenced by magnetic fields, exter
nal or self-induced, and a generalized Ohm's law (Ref. 19-8) in a moving gas is
needed such as the following vector form (this equation is given in scalar forms
in the section on electromagnetic devices):
j = a[E + v x B - ({3/aB)(j x B)] (19-12)
The motion of the gas containing charged particles is represented by the velo
city v; the magnetic induction field is given as B (a scalar B in the above
equation is required in the last term) and the electric field as £. In Eq.
19-12, both the current density j and the conductivity are understood to relate
to the free electrons as does {3, the Hall parameter. This Hall parameter is made
up from the electron cyclotron frequency (w) multiplied by the mean time it
takes an electron to lose its momentum by collisions with the heavier particles
(r). The second term in Eq. 19-12 is the induced electric field due to the motion
of the plasma normal to the magnetic field, and the last term represents the
Hall electric field which is perpendicular to both the current vector and the
applied magnetic field vector as the crossproduct (i.e., the "x ") implies (ion
slip and the electron pressure gradient have been omitted above, for simplicity).
676 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
Magnetic fields are responsible for most of the peculiarities observed in arc
behavior, such as pinching (a constriction arising from the current interacting
with its own magnetic field), and play a central role in non-thermal electro
magnetic forms of thrusting, as discussed in a following section.
Analytical descriptions of arcjets, based on the configuration shown in Fig.
19-5, may include the following:
1. The energy input occurs largely in the small-diameter laminar flow arc
region within the throat of the nozzle. As a first approximation, the
power can be computed from Joule heating U· E]; here the current den
sity and the voltage gradient across the arc have to be determined.
2. The cathode tip needs to be hot for thermionic emission of the arc elec
trons. It is heated by the arc and cooled by the propellant flow. The
cathode, typically a coaxial pointed rod, is located in the plenum region.
3. The nozzle inner walls are heated by the arc, which may be at a tempera
ture of 10,000 to 20,000 K. Typically the nozzle is cooled only by con
duction and by the boundary layers.
4. The hot gas in the arc proper must mix quickly with the rest of the
propellant; this is done by vortexing and turbulence.
5. Portions of the anode are heated to extreme temperatures in a section of
the divergent nozzle at the arc footpoint (the arc attachment region of the
electrode). The heating of the propellant is not all contained in the ple
num chamber, and heating of a supersonic flow is a source of losses.
To start an arcjet, a much higher voltage than necessary for operation has to
be applied momentarily in order to break down the cold gas. Some arcjets
require an extended initial burn-in period before stable consistent running
ensues. Because the conduction of electricity through a gas is inherently
unstable, arcs require an external ballast resistance to allow steady-state opera
tion. The cathode must run hot and is usually made of tungsten with 1 or 2%
thorium (suitable up to about 3000 K). Boron nitride, an easily shaped high
temperature electrical insulator, is commonly used. Carbon sheets are often
used between flanges.
1200 K 1400 K 1800 K
2000 K
-'°'' 2200 K
1400 K 2200~;;~----
Cathode
1600 K 1800 K current lines
FIGURE 19-5. Typical estimated temperature distribution in the electrodes of an
arcjet.
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 677
Presently, most arcjets are rather inefficient since less than half of the elec
trical energy goes into kinetic energy of the jet; the nonkinetic part of the
exhaust plume (residual internal energy and ionization) is the largest loss.
About 10 to 20% of the electric power input is usually dissipated and radiated
as heat to space or transferred by conduction from the hot nozzle to other parts
of the system. Arcjets, however, are potentially more scalable to large thrust
levels than other electric propulsion systems. Generally, arcjets exhibit about six
times the thrust-to-power ratio of a resistojet because of their increased specific
impulse coupled with relatively low values of efficiency. Arcjets have another
disadvantage in that the required power processing units are somewhat more
complex than those for resistojets, due to the complexity of arc phenomena.
The life of an arcjet can be severely limited by local electrode erosion and
vaporization, which is specifically due to action of tpe arc attachment point
and of the high operating temperatures in general. The rate of erosion is
influenced by the particular propellant in combination with the electrode mate
rials (argon and nitrogen give higher erosion rates than hydrogen), and by
pressure gradients, which are usually higher during start or pulsing transients
(sometimes by a factor of 100) than during steady-state operation. A variety of
propellants has been used in arcjet devices, including N 2, He, H 2, Ne, NH 3, Ar,
and the catalytic decomposition products of N 2H 4. Lithium metal, which is a
liquid at l 80°C, has been considered because of its low molecular mass, ease of
ionization, and its potential for transpiration cooling. Also lithium deposits on
the cathode tend to reduce cathode erosion. Lithium is very reactive and
requires special handling. Specific impulses for H are 1200 to 1500 sec,
2
which, along with other desirable heat-transfer properties, make both hydro
gen and lithium the propellants of choice for high performance. There are,
however, problems in the handling and storage of these propellants that
have been difficult to resolve.
An arcjet downstream of a catalytic hydrazine decomposition chamber
looks similar to the resistojet of Fig. 19-4, except that the resistor is replaced
by a smaller diameter arc heater. Also, larger cabling is needed to supply the
relatively much larger currents. Decomposed hydrazine would enter the arc at
a temperature of about 760°C. Liquid hydrazine is easier to store and provides
a low-volume, lighter-weight propellant supply system when compared to gas
eous propellants. Table 19-4 shows on-orbit performance of a system of 2-kW
hydrazine arcjets. Specific impulses from 400 to nearly 600 sec are typical for
hydrazine arcjets (Ref. 19-9). A 26-kW ammonia arcjet program (ESEX) is
presently undergoing space testing (Refs. 19-10, 19-11) with 787 sec specific
impulse and 1.93 N thrust.
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS
The acceleration of a hot propellant through the use of a supersonic nozzle is
the most conspicuous feature of thermal thrusting. Now we turn our study to
678 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
TABLE 19-4. On-Orbit 2 kW Hydrazine Arcjet System (PRIMEX, Ref. 19-9)
Propellant Hydrazine
Steady thrust 222-258 mN
Mass flow rate 36-47 mg/sec
Feed pressure 185-330 psia
Power control unit (PCU) input 4.4 kW (two thrusters)
System input voltage 68-71 V DC
PCU efficiency 93%
Specific impulse 570-600 sec
Dimensions
Arcjet 237 x 125 x 91 mm3
PCU 632 x 361 x 109 mm3
Mass
Arcjet (4) and cable 6.3 kg
PCU 15.8 kg
Total impulse 1,450,000 N-sec
acceleration of a propellant by electrical forces where no area changes are
essential for direct gas acceleration. The electrostatic (or Coulomb) force and
the electromagnetic (or Lorentz) force can be used to accelerate a suitable
propellant to speeds ultimately limited by the speed of light (note that thermal
thrusting is essentially limited by the speed of sound in the plenum chamber).
The microscopic vector force le on a singly charged particle can be written as
le = eE + eve x B (19-13)
where e is the electron charge magnitude, E the electric field vector, Ve the
velocity of the charged particle, and B the magnetic field vector. The sum of
the electromagnetic forces on all the charges gives the total force per unit
Fe
volume vector (scalar forms of this equation follow)
t = PeE+j X B (19-14)
Here Pe is the net charge density andj the electric current vector density. With
plasmas, which by definition have an equal mixture of positively and negatively
charged particles within a volume of interest, this net charge density vanishes.
On the other hand, the current due to an electric field does not vanish because
positive ions move opposite to electrons, thus adding to the current (but in
plasmas with free electrons this ion current can be very small). From Eq.
19-14, we see that an electrostatic accelerator must have a nonzero net charge
density that is commonly referred to as a space-charge density. An example of
an electrostatic accelerator is the ion engine, which operates with positive ions;
here magnetic fields are unimportant in the accelerator region. Electromagnetic
accelerators operate only with plasmas and rely solely on the Lorentz force to
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 679
accelerate the propellant. The Hall accelerator may be thought of as a crosslink
between an ion engine and an electromagnetic engine. These three types of
accelerator are discussed next. Research and development efforts in the field
of non-thermal thrusters have been extensive and truly international.
Electrostatic and electromagnetic devices require an understanding of the
basic laws of electricity and magnetism which are most elegantly summarized
in Maxwell's equations complemented by the force relation and Ohm's law,
both previously introduced. Moreover, various processes in ionization and
gaseous conduction need to be considered. This subject forms the basis of
the discipline of magnetohydrodynamics or MHD; however, a proper treat
ment of this subject is beyond the scope of this book.
Electrostatic Devices
Electrostatic thrusters rely on Coulomb forces to accelerate a propellant com
posed of non-neutral charged particles. They can operate only in a near
vacuum. The electric force depends only on the charge, and all charged parti
cles must be of the same "sign" if they are to move in the same direction.
Electrons are easy to produce and are readily accelerated, but they are so
extremely light in mass as to be impractical for electric propulsion. From
thermal propulsion fundamentals one might deduce that "the lighter the
exhaust particle the better." However, the momentum carried by electrons is
relatively negligible even at velocities near the speed of light. Thus, the thrust
per unit area that can be imparted to such an electron flow remains negligible
even when the effective exhaust velocity or specific impulse gets to be very high.
Accordingly, electrostatic thrusters use charged heavy-molecular-mass atoms
as positive ions ( a proton is 1840 times heavier than the electron and a typical
ion of interest contains hundreds of protons). There has been some research
work with small liquid droplets or charged colloid which can in turn be some
10,000 times heavier than atomic particles. In terms of power sources and
transmission equipment, the use of the heavier particles contributes to more
desirable characteristics for electrostatic thrusters~for example, high voltages
and low currents in contrast to low voltages and high currents with their
associated massive wiring and switching.
Electrostatic thrusters can be categorized by their source of charged parti
cles as follows:
I. Electron bombardment thrusters. Positive ions from a monatomic gas are
produced by bombarding the gas or vapor, such as xenon or mercury,
with electrons emitted from a heated cathode. Ionization can be either
DC or RF.
2. Ion contact thrusters. Positive ions are produced by passing the propellant
vapor, usually cesium, through a hot (about l I00°C or 2000°F) porous
tungsten contact ionizer. Cesium vapor was used extensively in the ori
ginal ion engines.
680 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
3. Field emission or colloid thrusters. Tiny droplets of propellant are charged
either positively or negatively as these droplets pass through an intense
electric field discharge. The stability of large, charged particles remains a
challenge.
Names such as xenon ion propulsion system (XIPS, Ref. 19-12, and
NSTA R/DS I, Refs. 19-10 and 19-13), radio-frequency field ionization
(RITA), cesium ion contact rockets, and colloid propulsion have been used
to identify electrostatic thrusters. The following general design criteria are
desirable for electrostatic thrusters, regardless of the charged particle source:
I. Minimum expenditure of energy per charged particle produced (this
energy is an irrecoverable loss).
2. Minimum ion-collision damage to the accelerating electrodes (sputtering)
and deterioration of component characteristics over thrust lifetime.
3. Maximum supply of ionized particles (related to propellant utilization
factor).
4. Stabilized uniform operation near the space-charge limitations of the
thruster (represented by the saturation current density within the accel
erator electrodes).
5. Production of particles of uniform mass and charge so that they can be
effectively accelerated by the electric field.
6. No reaction of the exhaust plume gases with spacecraft materials (Hg
vapor can react with many materials).
7. Nonhazardous propellants with good tankage properties (Hg and Cs are
poisonous and Xe is nontoxic but requires extra devices to conserve it).
Good tankage means propellant of high density, that is noncorrosive,
with stable storage over time.
8. No deposits of condensed species on spacecraft optical components (win
dows, lenses, mirrors, photovoltaic cell surfaces, or sensitive heat rejec
tion surfaces).
9. Specific impulse near optimum for a given mission (the specific impulse is
shown to be a function of accelerating voltage and the particle mass).
Basic Relationships for Electrostatic Thrusters
An electrostatic thruster, regardless of type, consists of the same series of basic
ingredients, namely, a propellant source, several forms of electric power, an
ionizing chamber, an accelerator region, and a means of neutralizing the
exhaust. While Coulomb accelerators require a net charge density of one polar
ity, the exhaust beam must be neutralized to avoid a space-charge buildup
outside of the craft which could easily nullify the operation of the thruster.
Neutralization is achieved by the injection of electrons downstream (see the
device descriptions that follow). The exhaust velocity is a function of the
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 681
voltage Vacc imposed across the accelerating chamber or grids, the mass of the
charged particle µ, and its electrical charge e. In the conservation of energy
equation the kinetic energy of a charged particle must equal the electrical
energy gained in the field, provided that there are no collisional losses. In its
simplest form,
2I µv 2 = e V a ce (19-15)
Now, solving for the speed gained in the accelerator,
(19-16)
When e is in coulombs, µ in kilograms, and Vacc is in volts, then v is in meters
per second. Using 9J1 to represent the molecular mass of the ion (W? = 1 for a
proton) then, for singly charged ions, the equation above becomes v (m/sec)
= 13,800 JVacc/W?. References 19-2 and 19-3 contain a detailed treatment of
the applicable theory.
In an ideal ion thruster, the current I across the accelerator represents the
sum of all the propellant mass (100% singly ionized) carried per second by the
particles accelerated:
l=m(e/µ) (19-17)
The total ideal thrust from the accelerated particles is given by Eq. 2-14 (with
out the pressure thrust term, as pressures are extremely low):
F = mv = IJ2µVacc/e (19-18)
As can be seen, for a given current and accelerator voltage the thrust is pro
portional to the mass-to-charge ratio of the charged particles. The thrust and
power absorbed by the neutralizing electrons are both small (about 1% ) and
can easily be neglected.
The current density j that can be obtained with a charged particle beam has
a saturation value depending on the geometry and the electrical field (see Ref.
19-14). This fundamental limit is caused by the internal electric field associated
with the ion cloud opposing the electric field from the accelerator when too
many charges of the same sign try to pass simultaneously through the accel
erator. The saturation current can be derived for a plane-geometry electrode
configuration from basic principles. A definition of the current density in terms
of the space charge density follows:
(19-19)
682 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
The voltage in a one-dimensional space-charge region is found from Poisson's
equation, where x represents distance and co is the permittivity of free space
which, in SI units, has the value of 8.854 x 10-12 farads per meter:
(19-20)
By solving Eqs. 19-16, 19-19, and 19-20 simultaneously and applying the
proper boundary conditions, we obtain the following relation known as the
Child-Langmuir law:
µe (
J = 4co VacJ3;2
y---;; (19-21)
9 d2
In this equation, d is the accelerator interelectrode distance. In SI units the
equation for the saturation current density can be expressed (for atomic or
molecular ions) as
(19-22)
Here the current density is in A/m2 , the voltage is in volts, and the distance in
meters. For xenon with electron bombardment schemes, values of} vary from 2
to about 10 mA/cm2 . The current density and the area are very sensitive to the
accelerator voltage as well as to the electrode configuration and spacing.
Using Eqs. 19-18 and 19-22 and letting the cross section be circular so that
I= (rrD2 /4)}, the thrust can be rewritten as
(19-23)
In SI units, for molecular ions, this becomes
(19-24)
The ratio of the exhaust beam emitter diameter D to the accelerator-elec
trode grid spacing d can be regarded as an aspect ratio of the ion accelerator
region. For multiple grids with many holes (see Figs. 19-6 and 19-7) the
diameter D is that of the individual perforation hole and the distance d is
the mean spacing between grids. Because of space-charge limitations, D/d
can have values no higher than about one for simple, single-ion beams. This
implies a rather stubby engine design with many perforations and the need for
multiple parallel ion engines for larger thrust values.
Using Eqs. 19-1, 19-2, and 19-17, and assuming r1t conversion of
potential energy to kinetic energy, the power of the electrostatic accelerator
region is
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 683
TABLE 19-5. Ionization Potentials for Various Gases
Ionization Molecular/Atomic Mass
Gas Potential (eV) (kg/kg-mo!)
Cesium vapor 3.9 132.9
Potassium vapor 4.3 39.2
Mercury vapor 10.4 200.59
Xenon 12.08 131.30
Krypton 14.0 83.80
Hydrogen, molecular 15.4 2.014
Argon 15.8 39.948
Neon 21.6 20.183
(19-25)
The overall efficiency of an electrostatic thruster will be a function of the
thruster efficiency T/i as well as of other loss factors. One loss of energy
which is intrinsic to the thruster is the energy expended in charging the pro
pellant, which is related to the ionization energy; it is similar to the dissociation
energy in electrothermal devices. Ionization represents an input necessary to
make the propellant respond to the electrostatic force and is non-recoverable.
The ionization energy is found from the ionization potential (.s 1) of the atom or
molecule times the current flow, as the example below shows. Historically, in
the development of the ion engine, propellant charging has been of primary
concern; the first engine designs used cesium because of its high vapor pressure
and ease of ionization, but cesium has many undesirable tankage properties (its
high reactivity is very difficult to isolate); then came mercury, with its well
known ionization behavior from fluorescent lamps, but mercury also proved to
be unworkable because of its poor tankage characteristics; finally, xenon
emerged with its reliable tankage properties and its relative ease of ionization.
Table 19-5 shows the molecular mass and first ionization potential for different
propellants. In actual practice, considerably higher voltages than the ionization
potential are required to operate the ionization chamber.
Example 19-2. For an electron-bombardment ion rocket the following data are given:
Working fluid xenon ( 131.3 kg/kg-mo!)
Net accelerator voltage 700 V
Distance d between grids 2.5 mm
Diameter D of each grid opening 2.0 mm
Number of holes in the grid 2200
Ionization potential for xenon 12.08 eV
684 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
Determine the thrust, exhaust velocity, specific impulse, mass flow rate, propellant
needed for 91 days' operation, the power of the exhaust jets, and the thruster efficiency
including ionization losses.
SOLUTION. The ideal thrust is obtained from Eq. 19-24:
F = 6.18 x 10-12 x (700)2 x (2/2.5)2 = 1.94 x 10-6 N per grid opening
The total ideal thrust is then obtained by multiplying by the number of holes
F = 2200 x 1.94 x 10-6 = 4.26 milliN
The exhaust velocity and specific impulse are obtained from Eq. 19-16:
v = 13, 800J700/131.3 = 31,860 m/sec
I,= 31,860/9.81 = 3248 sec
The mass flow rate, obtained from Eq. 2-6, is
m= F /v = 4.26 x 10-3 /31,860 = 1.34 x 10-7 kg/sec
For a cumulative period of 91 days of operation, the amount of xenon propellant
needed (assuming no losses) is
m=m fp = J.34 X 10-7 X 9J X 24 X 3600 = J.05 kg
The kinetic energy rate in the jet is
!mv2 = 0.5 X J.34 X 10-7 X (31,860)2 = 67.9 W
The ionization losses (/ 1) represent the nonrecoverable ionization energy which is related
to the ionization potential of the atom (c 1) times the number of coulombs produced per
second (see Table 19-5 and Eq. 19-17):
h = (12.08) X (J.34 X 10-7 X J.602 X 10-19)/(J.67 X 10-27 X J3J.3) = J.J8 W
As can be seen, the ionization energy in this ideal case is about 2% of the accelerator
energy rate. An equivalent way of calculating the ionization energy is to multiply the
ionization potential by the total ion current. The current is found from Eq. 19-17 to be
just under 10 mA. Of course, other losses would detract from the high ideal efficiency of
this device, which is 98.3%.
Ionization Schemes. Even though all ion acceleration schemes are the
same, there are several ionization schemes for electrostatic engines. Most
devices are DC but some are RF. To a great extent, the ionization chamber
is responsible for most of the size, mass, and perhaps efficiency of these
devices. We discuss some of these next.
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 685
Ionization of a gas by electron bombardment is a well-established technol
ogy (Ref. 19-14). Electrons are emitted from a thermionic (hot) cathode or the
more efficient hollow cathode and are forced to interact with the gaseous
propellant flow in a suitable ionization chamber. The chamber pressures are
low, typically 10-3 torr or 0.134 Pa. Figure 19-6 depicts a typical electron
bombardment ionizer which contains neutral atoms, positive ions, and elec
trons. Emitted electrons are attracted toward the cylindrical anode but are
forced by the axial magnetic field to spiral in the chamber, causing numerous
collisions with propellant atoms which lead to ionization. A radial electric field
removes the electrons from the chamber and an axial electric field moves the
ions toward the accelerator grids. These grids act as porous electrodes, which
Ionization Neutralizer (electron emitter)
chamber Magnetic field coil
ooo oooOC:oo
Anode -
Cathode 11 -
(electron emitter) Screen grid
~10--
I r"
roo) Accelerator grid -
11 0--- - Beam
e---
11
Electron
Distribution motion I I \ t I
grid
Electric power supply
Beams of ions
flow through
grid holes
Enlarged section of
dual grid with
lined up holes
FIGURE 19-6. Simplified schematic diagram of an electron bombardment ion thruster,
showing an enlarged section of the double grid.
686 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
electrostatically accelerate the positive ions. Loss of electrons is prevented by
maintaining the cathode potential negatively biased on both the inner grid
electrode and the opposite wall of the chamber. Electrons are routed from
the cylindrical anode through an external circuit to another hot cathode at
the exhaust beam in order to neutralize the exit beam.
Figure 19-7 shows a cross section of an ion propulsion thruster using xenon
as a propellant. It has three perforated electrically charged grids: the inner one
keeps the electrons in the ionizer, the middle one has a high voltage (1000 V or
more) and accelerates the ions, and the outer one keeps the neutralizing elec
trons from entering the accelerator region. Each grid hole is lined up with a
similar opening in the other grids and the ion beam flows through these holes.
If the grids are properly designed, only a few ions are lost by collision with the
surface; however, these collisions cause sputtering and greatly diminish the life
of the grids. Heavy metals such as molybdenum have been used, with graphite
composites being recently introduced. The neutralizer electron source is posi
tioned outside the beam.
Propellant Magnetic
electrical return path
isolator
Propellant
plenum
- ~ =-
Permanent
magnets
Ion-Extraction
electrodes (3)
screen
Cathode/
Permanent
keeper
magnets
subassembly
FIGURE 19-7. External view and section of a 500-watt ion propulsion system (XIPS),
rated at 18 mN and 2800 sec. Permanent magnets are used on the outside of the
ionization chamber; also shown are cathodes for ionization and for beam neutralization.
Xenon gas is delivered to the ionizer, then accelerated through the three sheet electrodes,
and then the ion beam is neutralized. (Drawing courtesy of Hughes Space and
Communications and the American Physical Society.)
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 687
Other key components are (I) the heaters for the ionizer and neutralizer
cathode, (2) propellant feed and electrical isolator, (3) electrical insulators, and
(4) permanent magnets. Reference 19-12 describes a 500 W xenon thruster.
Hollow cathodes represent an advancement in the state-of-the-art in electron
emission; this cathode consists of a high-temperature metal tube with a flow
limiting orifice and a porous tungsten cylinder impregnated with a barium
oxygen compound located next to the orifice. At about 1370 K the cathode is a
good thermionic emitter and thus the hot cylinder produces enough electrons
at a relatively low temperature. Xenon, the stable inert gas with the highest
molecular mass, is the propellant of choice. Xenon is a minor component of
air, in a concentration of about 9 parts in I 00 million, so it is a relatively rare
and expensive propellant whose availability is currently limited. Its critical
point is 289.7 Kand 5.84 MPa (the critical density is 1100 kg/m\ It is easily
stored below its critical temperature as a liquid and it does not pose any
problems of condensation or toxicity. Pressure regulators for xenon need to
be more sophisticated, because no leakages can be tolerated and because flows
are very small.
In general, losses can be reduced by (I) decreasing the electron energy and
ion density near the walls, (2) increasing the electron energy and ion density
near the grid, and (3) optimizing the screen-grid open area. Practical limita
tions and trade-offs exist for each feature. For example, a reduction in electron
energy to reduce the electron flux to the walls also increases collision losses. In
practice a small portion of the accelerated ion current impinges on these grids,
causing some power loss and some sputtering. Two aspects of the exhaust
beam are non-thrust producing: one is the aforementioned ionization energy
contained in the beam and the other one is any vector divergence present which
results in beam spreading. Beam spreading, or the radial velocity component of
beams, can result from causes both upstream and downstream of the exit
electrode. Much of the divergence produced upstream is linked directly with
internal geometrical details or "ion optics." Divergence downstream arises
from forces within the beam or space charge spreading. Once outside of the
accelerator chamber, repelling electrostatic forces between ions rapidly spread
the beam radially. Proper neutralization of the beam reduces this spreading,
allowing nearly axial velocities.
Other electrical charging schemes include surface or ion contact ionization,
field emission ionization, and radio-frequency ionization. These are fairly com
pact and effective ionizers when compared to electron bombardment. In field
emission charging, positive or negative particles are generated when tiny liquid
droplets (colloids) pass through a corona discharge. The radio-frequency ion
thruster consists of an RF electrodeless discharge that can be compact and
produce a high specific impulse; work on this technology is being done primar
ily in Germany.
The ion contact thruster produces ions by surface ionization. The criterion
that must be met is that the work function of the metal must be higher than
the ionization potential of the propellant. As the propellant atoms "adsorb"
688 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
on the surface they lose their valence electron to the metal and are re-emitted
as a positive ion. The requirement of a high work function and a hot metallic
surface restricts this surface to the refractory metals, notably tungsten.
Moreover, the requirement of low ionization potential and high atomic
mass restricts the propellant to cesium. The operating principle is the same
as in the so-called thermionic energy converter. Designs of the cesium/tung
sten combination have not yielded high reliability over long lifetimes. Cesium
as a propellant is extremely difficult to handle and has proven to be imprac
tical for spacecraft.
Electromagnetic Thrusters
This third major type of electric propulsion device accelerates propellant gas
that has been heated to a plasma state. Plasmas are mixtures of electrons,
positive ions, and neutrals that readily conduct electricity at temperatures
usually above 5000 K or 9000 R. According to electromagnetic theory, when
ever a conductor carries a current perpendicular to a magnetic field, a body
force is exerted on the conductor in a direction at right angles to both the
current and the magnetic field. Unlike the ion engine, this acceleration process
yields a neutral exhaust beam. Another advantage is the relatively high thrust
density, or thrust per unit area, which is normally about 10 to 100 times that of
the ion engines.
Many conceptual arrangements have undergone laboratory study, some
with external and some with self-generated magnetic fields, some suited to
continuous thrusting and some limited to pulsed thrusting. Table 19~6 shows
ways in which electromagnetic thrusters can be categorized. There is a wide
variety of devices with a correspondingly wide array of names. We will use
the term Lorentz-force accelerators when referring to the principle of opera
tion. For all of these devices the plasma is part of the current-carrying
electrical circuit and most are accelerated without the need for area changes.
Motion of the propellant, a moderate-density plasma or in some cases a
combination of plasma and cooler gas particles, is due to a complex set of
interactions. This is particularly true of short duration (3 to IO µsec) pulsed
plasma thrusters where nothing reaches an equilibrium state. Basically, the
designer of an electromagnetic thruster tries to (1) create a body of electri
cally conductive gas, (2) establish a high current within by means of an
applied electric field, and (3) accelerate the propellant to a high velocity in
the thrust vector direction with a significantly intense magnetic field (often
self-induced).
Conventional Thrusters-MPD and PPT. The description of magneto
plasma-dynamic (MP D) and pulsed-plasma ( P PT) electromagnetic thrusters
is based on the Faraday accelerator (Ref. 19-8). In its simplest form, a plasma
conductor carries a current in the direction of an applied electric field but
perpendicular to a magnetic field, with both of these vectors in turn normal to
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 689
TABLE 19-6. Categories of Electromagnetic Thrusters
Thrust Mode Steady State Pulsed (Transient)
Magnetic field source External coils or Self-induced
permanent
magnets
Electric current source Direct-current supply Capacitor bank and fast
switches
Working fluid Pure gas, as mixture, seeded Pure gas or vaporized
gas, or vaporized liquid liquid or stored as solid
Geometry of path of Axisymmetric (coaxial) Ablating plug,
working fluid rectangular, cylindrical, axisymmetric, other
constant or variable cross
section
Special features Using Hall current or Simple requirement for
Faraday current propellant stage
the direction of plasma acceleration. Equation 19-12 can be specialized to a
Cartesian coordinate system where the plasma's "mass-mean velocity" is in
the x-direction, the external electric field is in the y-direction, and the
magnetic field acts in the z-direction. A simple manipulation of Eq. 19-12,
with negligible Hall parameter {3, yields a scalar equation for the current,
(19-26)
and the Lorentz force becomes
(19-27)
f\
Here represents the force "density" within the accelerator and should not be
confused with F the thrust force; ft, has units of force per unit volume (e.g., N/
m3 ). The axial velocity vx is a mass-mean velocity that increases internally
along the accelerator length; the thrust equals the exit value (V max or v 2) multi
plied by the mass flow rate. It is noteworthy that, as long as Er and B: (or E/ B)
remain constant, both the current and the force decrease along the accelerator
length due to the induced field v,B: which subtracts from the impressed value
Er This increase in plasma velocity translates into a diminishing force along
such Faraday accelerators, which limits the final axial velocity. Although not
practical it would seem desirable to design for increasing E/ B along the chan
nel in order to maintain a substantial accelerating force throughout. But it is
not necessarily of interest to design for peak exit velocity because this might
translate into unrealistic accelerator lengths (see Problem 19-8). It can be
shown that practical considerations might restrict the exit velocity to below
one-tenth of the maximum value of Ey/ B:.
690 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
A "gasdynamic approximation" (essentially an extension of the classical
concepts of Chapter 3 to plasmas in an electromagnetic field) by Resler and
Sears (Ref. 19-15) indicates that further complications are possible, namely,
that a constant area accelerator channel would choke if the plasma velocity
does not have the very specific value of [(k - I)/k ](E / B) at the sonic location of
the accelerator. This plasma tunnel velocity would have to be equal to 40% of
the value of E / B for inert gases, since k (the ratio of specific heats) equals 1.67.
Thus constant area, constant E/ B accelerators could be severely constrained
because Mach one corresponds only to about 1000 m/sec in typical inert gas
plasmas. Constant-area choking in real systems, where the properties E, B, and
a are actually quite variable, is likely to manifest itself as one or more instabil
ities. Another problem is that values of the conductivity and electric field are
usually difficult to determine and a combination of analysis and measurement
is required to evaluate, for example, Eq. 19-12. Fortunately, most plasmas are
reasonably good conductors when less than 10% of the particles are ionized.
Figure 19-8 shows the simplest plasma accelerator, employing a self-induced
magnetic field. This is a pulsed plasma thruster (PPT), accelerating plasmas
"struck" between two rail electrodes and fed by a capacitor, which is in turn
charged by a power supply. The current flow through the plasma quickly dis
charges the capacitor and hence the mass flow rate must be pulsed according to
the discharge schedule. The discharge current forms a current loop, which
induces a strong magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of the rails.
Analogous to a metal conductor in an electric motor, the Lorentz force acts
on the plasma, accelerating it along the rails. For a rail widths, the total internal
accelerating force has the value F = s!B, where I is the total current and B the
magnitude of the self-induced field. Hence no area changes are required to
accelerate the propellant. Some electrical energy is lost to the electrodes and
the ionization energy is never recovered; moreover, this particular plasma does
not exit well collimated, and propellant utilization tends to be poor.
Rail
: / Plasma arc 4node
~
~ff«0o/§4Pffh'ffiW//////////,0l
(_:, ) ·--- f-:. ~- - + + + \ ,\\ '_ l/ ~
P<o:::'"\
~14~/ffff/J~M=-",
~f-
Induced magnetic field, B Rail cathode
Capacitor
FIGURE 19-8. Simple rail accelerator for self-induced magnetic field acceleration of
current-carrying plasma. The concept illustrates the basic physical interactions but
suffers from loss of propellant, resulting in low efficiency.
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 691
A practical version of the PPT was first put in operation in 1968 and is
shown in Chapter 1 as Fig. 1-10. It was used reliably in the USAF's LES-6
communication satellite, which had four PPTs producing approximately 12
million pulses over the life of the thruster. The propellant is stored in a solid
Teflon bar that is pushed against the rails by a suitable spring. The recharge
able capacitor discharges across the Teflon surface, momentarily ablating it,
and the current flow through the ionized vapor creates its own accelerating
magnetic field. About 10-5 g of Teflon and 5000 A peak current flow during a
0.6 µsec pulse. In the LES-6 electric propulsion system, one-third of the energy
is lost because of capacitor resistance. Other losses occur in ablation, dissocia
tion, ionization, plasma and electrode heating. Teflon stores well in space, is
easy to handle, and ablates with insignificant charring. In addition to the over
all simplicity of the device, there are no tanks, valves, synchronizing controls,
or zero-gravity feed problems. Another advantage is that pulsed thrusting is
very compatible with precise control and positioning where the mean thrust is
varied by changing the pulsing rate. Besides its very low efficiency, the big
disadvantage of this thruster is the size and mass of the power conditioning
equipment, which is presently the subject of technology programs toward
improvement. Better PPTs are under development (Ref. 19-16).
Figure 19-9 shows a hybrid electro thermal-electromagnetic concept. It pro
duces continuous thrust and Russians claim to have flown several versions.
Compared to an electrothermal arcjet, these devices operate at relatively lower
pressures and much higher electric and magnetic fields. Hydrogen and argon
are common propellants for such MPD arcjets. As with other electromagnetic
thrusters, exhaust beam neutralization is unnecessary. Problems of electrode
Permanent magnet or electromagnet
Nozzle-anode
---;,,,. Plasma
---;,,,. exhaust
Current
lines
FIGURE 19-9. Simplified diagram of a magnetoplasma dynamic (MPD) arcjet thrust
er. It is similar in construction to the thermal arcjet shown in Fig. 1-8 but it has a
stronger magnetic field to enhance the propellant acceleration.
692 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
erosion, massive electrical components, and low efficiencies (with their asso
ciated heat dissipation) have slowed implementation of these devices.
Ha/I-Effect Thrusters. When plasma densities are low enough and/or
magnetic fields are high enough, the Hall-effect electric field becomes quite
significant. This is the same phenomenon that is observed in the
semiconductor Hall effect where a voltage arises transverse to the applied
electric field. The Hall current can be understood to represent the motion
of the electron "guiding center" (Ref. 19-7) in a crossed electric and
magnetic field arrangement where collisions must be relatively insignificant.
The Hall thruster is of interest because it represents a practical operating
region for space propulsion, which Russian scientists were the first to
successfully exploit in a design originally called the stationary plasma
thruster or SPT, since a portion of the electron current "swirls in place"
(Ref. 19-17).
In order to understand the principle of the Hall thruster it is necessary to
rewrite in scalar form the generalized Ohm's law, Eq. 19-12. Because the
electron Hall parameter f3 = wr is no longer negligible, we arrive at two equa
tions, which are (in Cartesian form):
a
ix = l + /32[ E, - f3(Er - v,BJ] (19-28)
. a
l .r =~ 1 ~ + , {[ 3-(Er . - v,BJ + f3E.,J (19-29)
For a typical design, the application of a longitudinal electric field E, causes
a current density ix to flow in the applied field direction together with a
Hall current density ir which flows in the direction transverse to Ex· The
Hall electric field Er is externally shorted to maximize that current and the
electrodes are "segmented" in order not to short out the axial electric field
Ex· Note that f3E, > v,B:. This arrangement results in a reasonably com
plicated design (see Fig. 19-!0a), one which was deemed impractical. As will
be discussed next, for space propulsion, engineers prefer the cylindrical
geometry over the rectangular. It yields a simpler, more practical design;
here the applied magnetic field is radial and the applied electric field is axial;
the thrust-producing Hall current ie is azimuthal and counterclockwise and,
because it closes on itself, it automatically shorts out its associated Hall
electric field. The relevant geometry is shown in Fig. 19-lOb, and the equa
tions now become
. a
lx = l + /3 [E, + f3v,B,.] (19-30)
2
a
ie = l + /32 [f3E, - v,B,.] (19-31)
where, for an accelerator, f3E, > v,B,..
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 693
Accelerator Hall field
field shorting
~-------1,[1-------~
Hall
current
vx )-x
=>
Ionized z
flow
Perpendicular
magnetic
Segmented
field
cathode
(a) Linear Hall accelerator
Anode ring and Annular cylindrical cavity
gas distributor
Propellant
feed _____.
Radial magnetic
field
Hall current
~--<,j~~low
Power supply cathode
(b) Cylindrical Hall accelerator
FIGURE 19-10. Linear and cylindrical Hall accelerator configurations showing how an
applied axial field results in a transverse current that accelerates the plasma. The Hall
current peaks when the external resistance is absent (i.e., shorted). The presence of any
significant axial current density ix represents an inefficiency in Hall devices.
The current j, is needed for ionization (by electron bombardment) because
here the discharge chamber coincides with a portion of the accelerator region.
The Hall current Je performs the acceleration through the Lorentz force j Br.
8
The Hall parameter is calculated from the product of the electron cyclotron
frequency (Ref. 19-7) w = eB/µ,, and the collision timer of the electrons with
the heavier particles, which is part of the electrical conductivity in Eq. 9-11. In
order for a Hall generator to be of interest, the electron Hall parameter must be
much greater than one (in fact, Ref. 19-18 indicates that it should be at least
100), whereas ion motion must proceed relatively unaffected by magnetic
effects. Large electron Hall parameters are obtained most readily with low
plasma densities which translate into large times between collisions. Figure
19-11 shows a cutout of an SPT design with a redundant set of hollow cath
odes and the solenoid magnetic pair responsible for the magnetic field. In Hall
thrusters, the propellant gas, xenon or argon, is fed in the vicinity of the anode;
694 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
some gas is also provided through the cathode for more efficient cathode
operation. While the discharge chamber is not physically separated from the
accelerator region, the absence of ions in the first portion of the chamber
effectively differentiates the ionization region from the rest of the accelerator.
The local charge mass and density of the ions and electrons, together with the
magnetic field profiles, need to be tailored such that the ion motion is mostly
axial and the electron motion mostly spiral; this makes any given physical
design inflexible to changes of propellant. A variation of the original noncon
ducting accelerator wall SPT design is a smaller channel with metallic walls;
__::,,,__---- Outer
magnet
solenoid (x4)
Inner magnet
solenoid (detail) ...,,.-------tt"~
Discharge
chamber
Hollow
Anode/gas
cathodes
distributor
NOMINAL CHARACTERISTICS
Propellant Xenon
Thrust 83milli N
Specific impulse 1600 sec
Efficiency (thruster) 0.48
Electric power 1350 watts
Mass flow rate 5.3 millgram/s
Design total impulse 1, 000, 000 N-sec
Design cycles 4000
Thruster mass 3.5 kg
Thruster dimensions 15 x 22 x 12.5 cm
FIGURE 19-11. External view and quarter section of a 1350-watt Hall accelerator
(SPT). It is rated at a thrust of 83 mN and a specific impulse of 1600 sec. The radial
magnetic field is produced by an inner solenoid and four external solenoids. Ionization
takes place at the beginning of the insulated annular channel. The accompanying table
lists the nominal characteristics of SPT-100. (Drawing courtesy of Atlantic Research
Corporation and FAKEL.)
19.3. NON-THERMAL ELECTRICAL THRUSTERS 695
this "thruster with an anode layer" (TAL) has comparable performance with a
higher thrust density.
The Hall thruster may be classified as either an electromagnetic device (as
above) or an electrostatic device where the space charge in the ion acceleration
region is neutralized by an electron current transverse to the ion flow (Refs. I 9-
17, 19-18). Ifwe can mentally separate the process of ionization from that of
aceleration, then it is easy to see that electrons swirling within the accelerator
neutralize the ionic space charge as it moves from anode to cathode. This, in
effect, decreases the magnitude of the accelerating fields and removes most of
the beam-focusing requirements. In reality, there is some small interaction
between the azimuthal electron current and the ion current, but it diminishes
in proportion to the magnitude of the Hall parameter {3.
The Hall thruster yields the best /3-efficiency (rJH as defined below) when f3 is
very large. The high /3-limit is found, from Eqs. 19-30 and 19-31 and the
definition of the plasma conductivity a (Eq. 19-11 ), as
ix---* avxB,./ f3 = PeVx and Je---* aE,//3 (19-32)
F = JeB,. ---* PeE.,. ( 19-33)
rJH = Fv,/j,E." ---* 1.0 (19-34)
As can be seen, the accelerating force at this high Hall parameter limit is the
electrostatic force and, since the exit ionization levels are about 90%, this
corresponds in principle to the ion engine without any of its severe space
charge current limitations. Even though electron densities are in the order of
1015 to 1017 /m3 , the effective space-charge densities (Pe) are considerably lower
because of positive ion neutralization and approach zero at the exit.
Furthermore, the Hall /3-efficiency rJH as defined in the equations above reflects
strictly the influence of {3; this efficiency is ideal, being an internal parameter
that represents the loss that arises from the total current vector not being
perfectly normal to the flow direction. The overall efficiency is still given by
Eq. 19-2.
Example 19-3. (a) For the SPT-100 information given in Fig. 19-11, verify the values of
thrust and efficiency. (b) Using the definition of the Hall efficiency above, calculate its
value for f3 = 200 and for a representative value of the parameter B,.v,/ E, = 2.5 x 10-2
(this grouping of variables can be shown to be intrinsic in the Hall thruster).
SOLUTION. (a) The mass flow rate is 5.3 x 10-6 kg/sec, the specific impulse is 1600
sec, and the input power is 1350 W. Hence
F = m l,g = (5.3 x 10-6)(1600)(9.81) = 83.2 mN
0
T/ = Ff,go/2Pe = (8.3 x 10-2)(1600)(9.81)/2(1350) = 48.4%
1
Both of these answers compare very well with the information in Fig. 19-11.
696 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
(b) With some manipulation, and defining the Hall local efficiency parameter
~ = Brvx/Ex, Eq. 19-34 can be written as
= (-; + + = =
T/H ,6);/(J ,6;) 5/6 83.3%
Since the parameter ~ can be highly variable across real accelerator channels, this Hall
,8-efficiency is not necessarily representative of the overall efficiency, only of the max
imum efficiency. Clearly, even the ideal Hall accelerator is not as good as the ideal
Faraday or MPD accelerator. Nevertheless, for very large values of {3, it can be seen
that this efficiency will approach one for any value of~-
19.4. OPTIMUM FLIGHT PERFORMANCE
Now that we have discussed the various propulsion devices available, we
return to the discussion of flight performance. In Section 19.1 the fundamen
tal background for an optimum propulsion system design was introduced.
The discussion remained incomplete because the specific power and the effi
ciency of individual thrusters, among other things, need to be known for
further analysis. In a given mission, the payload mP1 and velocity increment
f..u are specified along with upper limits on electric power available (Ref.
19-19). In the analysis of Section 19.1, for any desired f..u/vn one can find
an optimum v/v, given a payload ratio; however, even when the choice of an
electric propulsion system has been made, thrust time tP is unspecified and
thus the total mass also remains unspecified. Thrust time or "burn time" is
the smallest for zero payload and continuously increases with increasing pay
load ratio. Concurrently, the specific impulse changes, making the problem
underconstrained.
Given the payload mass and the vehicle velocity increment, a spacecraft
design procedure might be followed using the optimum results of Section
19.1, e.g.:
l. Pick a payload mass fraction~from Fig. 19-3 this yields an optimum
f..u/vc.
2. From the given f..u, deduce the value of the characteristic speed Ve·
3. From the optimum value of v/v, in Fig. 19-3 at the given mass fraction,
or Eq. 19-9, calculate the corresponding value of v or I,.
4. Select an engine that can deliver this optimum ls and from its character
istics (i.e., a and TJ 1) find the thrusting time tP from Eq. 19-8.
5. Calculate mp from Section 19.1, including Eq. 4--7 and the given payload
ratio.
6. Check that the available vehicle electrical power (from Eq. 19-6) together
with vehicle volume plus the desirable mission time and total cost are not
exceeded.
19.4. OPTIMUM FLIGHT PERFORMANCE 697
As may be evident, a unique criterion for the choice of the assumed pay
load mass fraction is missing above. One possible solution to this problem is
to look for a "dual optimum", namely, to seek the shortest burn time con
sistent with the highest payload mass fraction. A maximum for the product
of mpi/m with !:!,.u/vc does exist as a function of v/ve (as shown in Ref. 19-
0
20). In other words, this dual optimum defines a minimum overall mass for a
specified payload consistent with minimum transfer time. Table 19-7 gives
estimated values of a along with the corresponding range of specific impulse
and the efficiency for electric propulsion systems in present engine
inventories.
The optimum formulation in Section 19.1, however, needs to be modified
to account for the portion of tankage mass which results from propellant
loading; with few exceptions, an additional 10% of the propellant mass
shows up as tank or container mass (this could be further refined to include
reserve propellant). Reference 19-16 includes information on this tankage
fraction for various thrusters. Fortunately, the analysis presented earlier is
little modified and it turns out that the optima are driven toward higher
specific impulses and longer times of operation. For an arbitrary tankage
fraction allowance <p,
J
!:!,.u_~ln[ (l+<p)+(v/v,)2 (19-35)
+ +
Ve - Ve (mpi/mo <p) (v/v,)2
When <p = 0.1 the actual value for the joint-optimized payload ratio can be
shown to be 0.46, with corresponding ratios of vehicle velocity increment as
0.299 and propellant exhaust velocity as 0.892. It turns out that this peak is
rather broad and that payload ratios between 0.34 and 0.58 are within 6% of
the mathematical optimum. Since engine parameters are rather "inelastic", and
since spacecraft designers have to deal with numerous constraints which are
not propulsion related, this wider range of optima is deemed a practical
necessity.
Given the desirable 0.34 to 0.58 optimum payload-ratio range, we may first
select one or more engines within the range 0.2268 ::: (I,*/ !:!,.u) ::: 0.4263, where
the optimized specific impulse (/:) is in sec and the velocity change in m/sec.
Since the vehicle's change in velocity is known, this condition yields the
required limits in specific impulse. We can then proceed to use the following
r;
joint-optimized, approximate polynomial relations to find mpi/m0 and as
follows:
a,
U) TABLE 19-7. Summary of Current Technology in Typical Electric Propulsion Engines
00
Specific power, Thruster Specific
a (W/kg) Efficiency, Impulse, Lifetime
Engine Type Identification (Reference) (estimated) ry, I, (sec) Power (W) Thrust (N) (hr) Status
Resistojet N 2H 4 (16, 21) (19-16, 19-21) 333-500 0.8-0.9 280-310 500-1500 0.2-0.8 > 390 Operational
NH 3 (19-16) 0.8 350 500
Primex MR-501B (19-21) 303-294 350-510 0.369-0.182 > 389 Operational
Arcjet N2H4 (19-21) 313 0.33-0.35 450-600 300-2000 0.2-0.25 > 830-1000 Operational
H (19-16, 19 21) 333 0.4 !000 5-100 K 0.2-0.25 > 1000 R&D
2
NH1 (19-16) 270-320 0.27-0.36 500-800 500-30 K 0.2-0.25 1500 Qualified
Primex Mr-509 (19-21) (c) 115.3 >0.31 > 502 (545) 1800 0.213-0.254 > 1575 Qualified
Primex MR-510 (19-21) (c) 150 >0.31 > 570-600 2170 0.222 0.258 > 2595 Qualified
Ion Propulsion XIPS (19-21) 100 0.75 2800-3500 200-4000 0.015-0.014 > 8000 Operational
Hughes XIPS-13 (19-21) 0.46, 0.54 2585, 2720 427, 439 0.0178, 0.018 12,000 Qualified
Hughes XIPS-25 ( 19 -21) 0.65, 0.67 2800 1400 0.0635 >4350 Qualified
NSTAR/OSI (1913) 45 0.6 3100 2300 2500 0.093 > 10,000 Operational
RITA 15 (a) 9.61 3000 4000 540 0.015 > 20,000 Qualified
UK-IO/T5 (UK) (19 21) 0.55-0.64 3090 3300 278-636 0.010-0.025 10,700 Qualified
ETS-YI IES (Jap.) (19 21) 0.4 3000 730 0.02 Operational
DASA RIT-10 (Ger.) (19 21) 0.38 3000 3150 585 0.015 Operational
Hall Hall (XE) (19 16) 150 0.5 1500-1600 300-6000 0.04 > 7000 Operational
SPT (XE) (19 21) 0.48 1600 150 1500 0.04 0.2 >4000
ARC/Fake! SPT-100 ( 19 16) 169.8 0.48 1600 1350 0.083 > 7424 Operational
Fakel SPT-70 (19-3) 0.46, 0.50 1510, 1600 640-660 0.04 9000 Operational
TAL D-55 (Russia) (19-21) - 50.9 0.48, 0.50-0.60 950-1950 600-1500 0.082 > 5000 Operational
Primex BPT Hall (c) 0.5 1500-1800 500-6000 Development
MPD--Steady Applied Field (19-16) 0.5 2000-5000 1-100 K R&D
Self-field (19-16) 0.3 2000-5000 2004000 K R&D
MPD-Pu!sed Teflon PPT (19-16) 0.07 1000 l-200 4000 N-sec > 101 pulses Operational
LES 8/9 PPT (19-21) 0.0068, 0.009 836, !000 25, 30 0.0003 > 101 pulses Operational
NASA/Primex E0-1 (c) -20 0.098 I 150 up to 100 3000 N-sec Operational
Primex PRS-101 (c) I 150 1.4 mN, 2 Hz Operational
EPEX arcjet (Jap.) (19-21) 0.16 600 430 0.023 Operational
Manufacturers: (a): Daimler-Chrysler Aerospace, AG., (h): Atlantic Research Corporation, USA Fakel (Russia), (c): Primex Aerospace Company
19.4. OPTIMUM FLIGHT PERFORMANCE 699
2
m~ I
mo ~ [ -0.1947 + 2.972 ( l::S!*. u ) - 2.7093 ( fJl*Iu ) ] (19-36)
r; ~ [67.72 - 39.67(mpl) + 20.04(mp/)2 ] u:)2 (sec) (19-37)
mo mo
ctrJ1
The success of this approach hinges on the validity of the engine information
employed. In particular, the specific power should represent all the inert com
ponents of the engine, which can be reasonably assumed to depend on the
power level. The payload mass must reflect all mass that is neither proportional
to the electrical power nor propellant related. The tankage fraction allowance
must reflect the total propellant mass and thus the use of Eq. 19-35 is neces
sary. It is assumed that there is available a source of electricity (typically from
28 to 110 V DC for solar-powered craft) which is not tagged to the propulsion
system. The analysis also assumes that the efficiency is not a function of specific
impulse (in contrast to Ref. 19-22); this implies that an average or effective
value can be used. Since each individual engine type spans a somewhat limited
range of specific impulse, this assumption is not deemed to be too restrictive.
For the continuous thrust schedules required by electric engines, thrust time is
equal to mission time.
Example 19-4. List the performance of three electric propulsion engines within the
dual-optimum criteria to carry a 100 kg payload through a change of velocity of
7000 m/sec. Calculate total mass, burn time, thrust, and power requirements.
SOLUTION. We first calculate the dual-optimum specific-impulse range, which turns
out to be between 1590 sec and 2980 sec. Then, we pick engines from the inventory (see
Table 19-7). Results are tabulated below for three thrusters.
0.2268Llu :S 1;[sec] :S 0.4263Llu
mo= 100/(mpi/m 0) = 100 + 1.ImP + mPP = 100 + mp(l.l + (v/vc)2)
(v/vJ* = 0.6953 + 0.5 I39(mpi(m 0) - O. I 736(mpif mo)2
Hall Effect Thruster Xenon Ion Propulsion System Magnetoplasma Dynamic
1; = 1600 sec 1; = 2585 sec 1; = 3000 sec
co1, = 93.5 W/kg ctTJ, = 46 W/kg ctTJ, = 30 W/kg
(Demonstrated) (Demonstrated) (Experimental)
m
1;
pi/mo = 0.343, m0 = 29! kg m
1;
p1/mo = 0.533, m0 = 187 kg m
1;
pi/mo = 0.581, m0 = 172 kg
= 17.9 days = 87.9 days = !78 days
F = l.06 N F = 0.149 N F= 69.7 mN
Pe= 15.4 kW Pe= 4.12 kW Pe= 2.05 kW
As can be seen, total mass, along with thrust, decreases with increasing specific
impulse, whereas thrust time increases. The power variation Pe also decreases, reflecting
the individual choice of engines and the engine data from Table 19-7. Any engine can be
700 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
eliminated when the required power exceeds the power available in the spacecraft or
when the burn time exceeds some specified mission time constraint. Most often, cost is
the ultimate selection criterion and is largely dependent on m 0.
19.5. MISSION APPLICATIONS
Three principal application areas have been described in the introduction to
this chapter. The selection of a particular electric propulsion system for a given
flight application depends not only on the characteristics of the propulsion
system (which are described in this chapter) but also on the propulsive require
ments of the particular flight mission, the proven performance of the specific
candidate propulsion system, along with vehicle interfaces and the power con
version and storage systems. In general, the following criteria can be enumer
ated:
1. For very precise low-thrust station-keeping and attitude control applica
tions, pulsed thrusters are generally best suited.
2. For deep space missions where the vehicle velocity increment is appreci
ably high, systems with very high specific impulse will give better perfor
mance. As shown in Section 19. I, the optimum specific impulse is
proportional to the square root of the thrust operating time.
3. The higher the specific impulse, the more electrical power is required for a
given thrust level. This translates into larger size and mass requirements
for the power conditioning and generating equipment. However, for a
given payload and vehicle velocity increase, the total mass and the thrust
vary in nontrivial ways with respect to the specific impulse (see Example
19-4).
4. Since most missions of interest require long life, system reliability is a key
selection criterion. Extensive testing under all likely environmental con
ditions (temperatures, pressures, accelerations, vibration, and radiation
conditions) is required for high reliability. Ground testing and qualifica
tion of electric engines should be no different from that of their chemical
counterparts, where large resources have made it possible to develop the
present inventory of reliable engines. Simulation of the low pressures in
space requires large vacuum test chambers.
5. There is a premium on high thruster efficiency and high power-conversion
efficiency. This will reduce the inert mass of the power supply system and
reduce thermal control requirements, all of which usually results in lower
total mass and higher vehicle performance.
6. For every propulsion mission there is a theoretically optimum range of
specific impulse (see Fig. 19-3) and thus an optimum electrical propulsion
system design. While this optimum may be blurred by some conflicting
system constraints (e.g., flight time or maximum power or size con-
19.6. ELECTRIC SPACE-POWER SUPPLIES AND POWER-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS 701
straints or cost), the present variety in the engine inventory can meet
most goals.
7. The present state of the art in electrical power sources appears to limit the
type and size of electric propulsion systems that can be integrated, parti
cularly for missions to the outer planets, unless nuclear energy power
generation on board the spacecraft becomes more developed and accep
table.
8. Practical factors, such as the storing and feeding of liquids in zero grav
ity, the availability of propellant (in the case of xenon), the conditioning
of power to the desired voltage, frequency, and pulse duration, as well as
the redundancy in key system elements, the survival of sensors or con
trollers in long flights, and the inclusion of automatic self-checking
devices along with cost, will all influence the selection and application
of specific types of electric rockets.
9. In addition to tankage considerations, propellant selection will also be
influenced by certain interface criteria such as plume noninterference
with communication signals. Plumes must also be thermally benign
and noncondensing on sensitive surfaces of the spacecraft such as optical
windows, mirrors, and solar cells.
Synchronous or geostationary satellites are extremely attractive for commu
nications and earth observation; their long life requires extensive station-keep
ing propulsion requirements. Until recently, the main limitation to any such life
increase had been the propellant requirement. There is also a propulsion need
for orbit raising from LEO to GEO. Earth satellites in inclined orbits with
precise time-trajectory position requirements need propulsion units to main
tain such orbits, counteracting certain perturbing natural forces described in
Chapter 4.
The increasing life trend in earth-orbit satellites from a minimum of 8 years
to at least 15 years significantly increases their total impulse and durability
requirements of the propulsion system. For example, the north-south station
keeping (NSSK) function of a typical geosynchronous satellite requires about
40,000 to 45,000 N-sec or 9000 to I 0,000 !bf-sec of impulse per year. Table 19-8
shows some of the characteristics required of small and large electric thrusters
for various propulsion functions in space.
19.6. ELECTRIC SPACE-POWER SUPPLIES AND POWER
CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
The availability of substantial amounts of electrical power in space is consid
ered to be one of the most significant factors in electrical propulsion. Several
combinations of energy sources and conversion methods have reached proto
type stages, but only solar cells (photovoltaic), isotope thermoelectric genera-
702 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
TABLE 19-8. Space Propulsion Application and Characteristics for Three Thrust
Levels of Electric Propulsion Thrusters
Thrust Class Application (Life) Characteristics Status
Micronewtons E-W station keeping 10-500 W power Operational
(µN) Attitude control Precise impulse bits of
Momentum wheel ~ 2 X 10-5 N-sec
unloading
(15-20 years)
Millinewtons N-S station keeping Kilowatts of power Operational
(mN) Orbit changes Impulse bits ~ 2 X I 0-3
Drag cancellation N-sec for N-S,
Vector positioning impulse/year of
(20 years) 46,000 N-sec/100 kg
spacecraft mass
0.2to!ON Orbit raising Long duration In development
Interplanetary travel 10-300 kW of power
Solar system Intermittent and
exploration continuous operation
(1-3 years)
tion units (nuclear), and fuel cells (chemical) have advanced to the point of
routine space-flight operation. Power output capacity of operational systems
has been increasing from the low one-kilowatt range to the medium tens of
kilowatts required for some missions. The high end of a hundred or more
kilowatts is still pending some technological (and political) breakthroughs.
Space power level requirements have been increasing with the increased
capacity of earth-orbit communications satellites and with planned missions,
manned and robotic, to the moon and nearby planets. Payload requirements
and thrust duration dictate the power level. Commercial communications satel
lites can temporarily reduce the communications volume during orbit main
tenance so that the electric power does not require a dedicated power supply
for the propulsion system, but larger power demands require enhanced solar
cell capabilities. Some communications satellites actually share part or all of
the power-conditioning equipment with their electric thrusters.
Power Generation Units
Electric power-generation units are classified as either direct (no moving
mechanical parts) or dynamic. When the primary driver is reliability and the
total power is small, direct conversion has been preferred but, with the advent
of the Space Shuttle and with the proposed manned space station, dynamic
systems are being reconsidered. Many diverse concepts have been evaluated for
meeting the electrical power demands of spacecraft, including electric propul-
19.6. ELECTRIC SPACE-POWER SUPPLIES AND POWER-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS 703
sion needs. Direct energy conversion methods considered include photovoltaic,
thermoelectric, thermionic, and electrochemical, while indirect methods (with
moving parts) include the Brayton, Rankine, and Stirling cycles.
Batteries. Batteries can basically be classified as either primary or
secondary. Primary batteries consume their active materials and convert
chemical energy into electrical. Secondary batteries store electricity by
utilizing a reversible chemical reaction and are designed to be recharged
many times. There are both dry-cell and wet-cell primary batteries. The
importance of primary batteries passed with the short-lived satellites of the
early 1960s. Secondary batteries with recharging provisions provide electrical
power at output levels and lifetimes longer than primary batteries. Batteries
must be sealed against the space vacuum or housed inside pressurized
compartments. Secondary batteries are a critical component of solar cell
systems for power augmentation and emergency backup and the periods
when the satellite is in the earth's shadow.
Fuel Cells. Chemical fuel cells are conversion devices used to supply space
power needs for 2 to 4 weeks and for power levels up to 40 kW in manned
missions. A catalyzer controls the reaction to yield electricity directly from
the chemical reaction; there is also some heat evolved, which must be
removed to maintain a desirable fuel cell temperature. They are too massive
for both robotic and long-duration missions, having also had some reliability
problems. Recent improvements in fuel cell technology have considerably
advanced their performance.
Solar Cell Arrays. Solar cells rely on the photovoltaic effect to convert
electromagnetic radiation. They have supplied electrical power for most of
the long-duration space missions. The first solar cell was launched in March
1958 on Vanguard I and successfully energized data transmission for 6 years.
Solar arrays exist in sizes up to 10 kW and could potentially grow to 100
kW sizes in earth orbits.
An individual cell is essentially one-half of a p-n junction in a transistor,
except that the surface area has been suitably enlarged. When exposed to sun
light, the p-n junction converts photon energy to electrical energy. Typically,
solar cell arrays are designed for 20% over-capacity to allow for material
degradation toward the end of life. Loss in performance is due to radiation
and particle impact damage, particularly in the radiation belts around the
earth. There has been some improvement in efficiency, reliability, and power
per unit mass. For example, standard silicon cells deliver 180 W/m2 and arrays
have 40 W/kg. Newer gallium arsenide cells produce 220 W/m2 and are more
radiation resistant than silicon cells; gallium arsenide cells are presently space
qualified and integrated; together with parabolic concentrators, their arrays
can reach I 00 W /kg (Ref. 19-16). In the near future, multi-junction solar
704 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
cells designed to utilize a greater portion of the solar spectrum will be used;
they have already demonstrated 24% efficiency.
Factors that affect the specific mass of a solar array, besides conversion
efficiency, include the solar constant (which varies inversely as the square of
the distance from the sun) and the manufactured thinness of the cell.
Orientation to the sun is a more critical factor when solar concentrators are
being used. Cell output is a function of cell temperature; performance can
suffer as much as 20% for a l00°F increase in operating temperature so that
thermal control is critical. Solar cell panels can be (1) fixed and body mounted
to the spacecraft, (2) rigid and deployable (protected during launch and posi
tioned in space), (3) flexible panels that are deployed (rolled out or unfolded),
and (4) deployed with concentrator assist.
In addition to the solar arrays, their structure, deployment and orientation
equipment, other items including batteries, plus power conditioning and dis
tribution systems are assigned to the power source. Despite their apparent
bulkiness and battery dependence, solar-cell electrical systems have emerged
as the dominant generating power system for unmanned spacecraft.
Nuclear Thermoelectric and Thermionic Systems. Nuclear energy from
long-decay radioisotopes and from fission reactors has played a role in the
production of electricity in space. Both thermoelectric (based on the Seebeck
effect) and thermionic (based on the Edison effect) devices have been
investigated. These generators have no moving parts and can be made of
materials reasonably resistant to the radioactive environment. But their
specific power is relatively low and cost, availability, and efficiency have
been marginal.
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s nuclear fission reactors were regarded as
the most promising way to meet the high power demands of space missions,
particularly trips to the outer planets involving months and perhaps years of
travel. Radioisotope thermoelectric power has been embodied in a series of
SNAP (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) electrical generating units which
were designed and tested, ranging from 50 W to 300 kW of electrical output.
Fission reactors were included in the SPAR (Space Power Advance Reactor)
program, later renamed SP-100, which was to feature a nuclear-thermoelectric
generator with an electrical output of I 00 kW; this program was discontinued
in 1994. The most recent space nuclear reactor generator is the Russian
TOPAZ that has been space tested up to nearly 6 kW. It consists of sets of
nuclear rods each surrounded by a thermionic generator. TOPAZ technology
was obtained by the USA from the Russians and efforts to upgrade and flight
qualify the system were underway in the mid-l 990s.
Thermionic converters have a significant mass advantage over thermoelec
tric ones, based on their higher effective radiator temperatures. Since thermal
efficiencies for both thermoelectric and thermionic conversion are below 10%
and since all unconverted heat must be radiated, at higher temperatures ther
mionic radiators are less massive. Moreover, cooling must be present at times
19.6. ELECTRIC SPACE-POWER SUPPLIES AND POWER-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS 705
when no electricity is generated since the heat source cannot be "turned off."
Depending on the location of the waste heat, clever designs are needed, involv
ing heat pipes or recirculating cooling fluids.
Long-Duration High-Output Dynamic Systems. Designs of electric
power generation with outputs of 10 to 1000 kW here on earth have been
based on Stirling or Rankine heat engine cycles with nuclear, chemical, and
even solar power sources. Overall efficiencies can be between 10 and 40%,
but the hardware is complex, including bearings, pumps, reactors, control
rods, shielding, compressors, turbines, valves, and heat exchangers.
Superconducting magnets together with advances in the state-of-the-art of
seals, bearings, and flywheel energy storage have made some dynamic units
relatively more attractive. There remain development issues about high
temperature materials that will withstand intense nuclear radiation fluxes
over several years; there are still some concerns about achieving the required
reliability in such complex systems in the space environment. While limited
small-scale experiments have been conducted, the development of these
systems remains a challenge. The potential of flight accidents, i.e., the
unwanted spreading of nuclear materials, remains a concern for the launch
and in manned space missions.
Power-Conditioning Equipment
Power-conditioning equipment is a necessary part of electric propulsion sys
tems because of inevitable mismatches in voltage, frequency, power rate, and
other electrical properties between the space-power generating unit and the
electric thruster. In some earlier systems, the power-conditioning equipment
has been more expensive, more massive, and more difficult to qualify than the
thruster itself. If the thrust is pulsed, as in the PPT, the power-conditioning
unit has to provide pulse-forming networks for momentary high currents, exact
timing of different outputs, control and recharging of condensers. Ion engines
typically require from I 000 to 3000 V DC; the output of solar-cell arrays is 28
to 300 V DC so there is a need for DC-to-DC inverters and step-up transfor
mers to accomplish the task. Often this equipment is housed in a single "black
box," termed the power conditioner. Modern conditioning equipment contains
all the internal logic required to start, safely operate, and stop the thruster; it is
controlled by on-off commands sent by the spacecraft-control processor.
Besides the above functions that are specific to each engine, power-condition
ing equipment may provide circuit protection and propellant flow control as
well as necessary redundancies.
As may be apparent from Table 19-7, one of the largest contributors to the
specific mass of the system (a) is the power-conditioning equipment. Here,
electrothermal units have the simplest and lightest conditioning equipment.
Ion engines, on the other hand, have the heaviest equipment, with Hall thrus
ters somewhere in between (Ref. 19-17). PPTs tend to be heavy, but advances
706 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
in energy storage capacitors can improve this situation. In fact, advances in
solid-state electronic pulse circuits together with lighter, more efficient, and
higher temperature power-conditioning hardware are an area of great interest
to the implementation of electric propulsion units. The efficiency of the equip
ment tends to be high, about 90% or more, but the heat generated is at a low
temperature and must be removed to maintain the required moderately low
temperatures of operation. When feasible, the elimination of conditioning
equipment is desirable, the so-called direct drive, but a low-pass filter would
still be necessary for electromagnetic interference (EMI) control (more infor
mation in Ref. 19-21).
PROBLEMS
1. The characteristic velocity ve = J21paT/ was used to achieve a dimensionless repre
sentation of flight performance analysis. Derive Eq. 19-35 without any tankage
fraction allowance. Also, plot the payload fraction against v/v, for several values
of !'!,.u/v, .. Discuss your results with respect to optimum performance.
2. For the special case of zero payload, determine the maximized values of !'!,.u/vn v/v,,
mp/mo, and mpp/m in terms of this characteristic velocity as defined in Problem I.
0
Answer: l'!,.u/v, = 0.805, vive= 0.505, mp/mo= 0.796, mpp/mo = 0.204.
3. For a space mission with an incremental vehicle velocity of 85,000 ft/sec and a
specific power of a= 100 W/kg, determine the optimum values of 1, and IP for
two maximum payload fractions, namely 0.35 and 0.55. Take the thruster efficiency
as 100% and <p = 0.
Answer: for 0.35: 1, = 5.11 x 103 sec; IP= 2.06 x 107 sec; for 0.55: ls= 8.88 x 103
sec; IP= 5.08 x 107 sec.
4. Derive Eq. 19-7 showing v, explicitly.
5. An electric rocket uses heavy charged particles with a charge-to-mass ratio of 500
coulombs per kilogram producing a specific impulse of 3000 sec. (a) What accel
eration voltage would be required for this specific impulse? (b) If the accelerator
spacing is 6 mm, what would be the diameter of an ion beam producing 0.5 N of
thrust at this accelerator voltage?
Answers: (a) 8.66 x 105 V; (b) D = l.97 mm.
6. An argon ion engine has the following characteristics and operating conditions:
Voltage across ionizer= 400 V Voltage across accelerator= 3 x 104 V
Diameter of ion source = 5 cm Accelerator electrode spacing = 1.2 cm
Calculate the mass flow rate of the propellant, the thrust, and the thruster overall
efficiency (including ionizer and accelerator). Assume singly charged ions.
Answer: m = 2.56 x 10-7 kg/sec; F = 9.65 x 10-2 N; T/i = 98.7%
7. For a given power source of 300 kW electrical output, a propellant mass of 6000
lbm, a = 450 W /kg, and a payload of 4000 lbm, determine the thrust, ideal velocity
increment, and duration of powered flight for the following three cases:
(a) Arcjet ls = 500 sec T/i = 0.35
SYMBOLS 707
(b) Ion engine ls= 3000 sec T/, = 0.75
(c) Hall engine ls= 1500 sec T/, =0.50
Answers:
(a) tP = 3.12 x 105 sec; /':,.u = 3.63 x 103 m/sec; F = 42.8 N
(b) tP = 5.24 x 106 sec; f,,u = 2.18 x 104 m/sec; F = 15.29 N
(c) tP = 1.69 x 106 sec; f,,u = 1.09 x 104 m/sec; F = 20.4 N
8. A formulation for the exit velocity that allows for a simple estimate of the accel
erator length is shown below; these equations relate the accelerator distance to the
velocity implicitly through the acceleration time t. Considering a flow at a constant
plasma of density Pm (which does not choke), solve Newton's second law first for
the speed v(t) and then for the distance x(t) and show that
v(t) = (Ey/ BJ[I - e-i/r] + v(O)e-l/r
x(t) = (E,/ BJ[t + ,e-,;r - r] + x(O)
where r = Pm/aB; and has units of sec. For this simplified plasma model of an
MPD accelerator, calculate the distance needed to accelerate the plasma from rest
up to v = O.Ol(E/B) and the time involved. Take a= 100 mho/m, B = 10-3 tesla
2
(Wb/m2 ), Pm= 10-3 kg/m3 , and £, = 1000 V/m.
Answer: 503 m, 0.1005 sec ·
9. Assume that a materials breakthrough makes it possible to increase the operating
temperature in the plenum chamber of an electrothermal engine from 3000 K to
4000 K. Nitrogen gas is the propellant which is available from tanks at 250 K.
Neglecting dissociation, and taking a = 200 W /kg and rit = 3 x 10-4 kg/sec, calcu
late the old and new f,,u corresponding to the two temperatures. Operating or thrust
time is 10 days, payload mass is 1000 kg, and k = 1.3 for the hot diatomic molecule.
Answer: 697 m/sec old, 815 new.
10. An arcjet delivers 0.26 N of thrust. Calculate the vehicle velocity increase under
gravitationless, dragless flight ior a 28-day thrust duration with a payload mass of
100 kg. Take thruster efficiency as 50%, specific impulse as 2600 sec, and specific
power as 200 W/kg. This is not an optimum payload fraction; estimate an ls which
would maximize the payload fraction with all other factors remaining the same.
Answer: /':,.u = 4.34 x 103 m/sec; l, = 2020 sec ( decrease).
SYMBOLS
a acceleration, m/sec2 (ft/sec2 )
A area, cm2 or m2
B magnetic flux density, Web/m2 or tesla
cP specific heat, J/kg-K
d accelerator grid spacing, cm (in.)
D hole or beam diameter, cm (in.)
e electronic charge, 1.602 x 10-19 coulomb
E electric field, V/ m
708 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
f microscopic force on a particle
F thrust force, N or mN (!bf or mlbf)
Fx accelerating force density inside channel, N/m3 (lbf/ft3 )
g constant converting propellant ejection velocity units to sec, 9.81
0
m/sec2 or 32.2 ft/sec2
I total current, A
ls specific impulse, sec [It optimum]
j current density, A/m2
J,,jy orthogonal current density components
j Hall current density, A/m2
8
k specific heat ratio
h ionization loss, W
mp propellant mass, kg (lbm)
mPP power plant mass, kg (lbm)
mP1 payload mass, kg (lbm)
m initial total vehicle mass, kg (lbm)
0
m
mass flow rate, kg/sec (lbm/sec)
file atomic or molecular mass, kg/kg-mo! (lbm/lb-mol)
ne electron number density, m-3 (fC3 )
P power, W
Pe electrical power, W
PJet kinetic power of jet, W
R plasma resistance, ohms
s distance, cm (in.)
time, sec
[t;
tP propulsive time, sec optimum]
T absolute temperature, K (R)
t!u vehicle velocity change, m/sec (ft/sec)
v propellant ejection velocity, m/sec (ft/sec)
Vx plasma velocity along accelerator, m/sec
Ve characteristic speed
V voltage, V
Vacc accelerator voltage, V
x linear dimension, m (ft)
Greek Letters
a specific power, W/kg (W /lbm)
f3 electron Hall parameter (dimensionless)
co permittivity of free space, 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m
c ionization energy, eV
1
1] H Hall thruster {>-efficiency
1] thruster efficiency
1
µ, ion mass, kg
/1,e electron mass, 9.11 x 10-31 kg
REFERENCES 709
ve charge particle velocity, m/sec
~ Hall thruster local efficiency parameter
Pe space charge, coulomb/m3
a plasma electrical conductivity, mho/m
r mean collision time, sec (also characteristic time, sec)
<p propellant mass tankage allowance
w electron cyclotron frequency, (sec)-1
REFERENCES
19-1. R. G. Jahn, Physics of Electric Propulsion, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 1968, pp. 103-110.
19-2. E. Stuhlinger, Ion Propulsion for Space Flight, McGraw-Hill Book Company,
New York, 1964.
19-3. P. J. Turchi, "Electric Rocket Propulsion Systems," Chapter 9 in R. W.
Humble, G. N. Henry, and W. J. Larson (Eds.), Space Propulsion Analysis
and Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995, pp. 509-598.
19-4. A. Spitzer, "Near Optimal Transfer Orbit Trajectory Using Electric
Propulsion," AAS Paper 95-215, American Astronautical Society Meeting,
Albuquerque, NM, 13-16 February 1995.
19-5. D. B. Langmuir, "Low-Thrust Flight: Constant Exhaust Velocity in Field-Free
Space," in H. Seifert (Ed.), Space Technology, John Wiley & Sons, New York,
1959, Chapter 9.
19-6. C. D. Brown, Spacecraft Propulsion, AIAA Education Series, Washington, DC,
1996.
19-7. F. F. Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics, Plenum Press, New York, 1974.
19-8. G. W. Sutton and A. Sher'llan, Engineering Magnetohydrodynamics, McGraw
Hill Book Company, New York, 1965.
19-9. D. M. Zube, P. G. Lichon, D. Cohen, D. A. Lichtin, J. A. Bailey, and N. V.
Chilelli, "Initial On-Orbit Performance of Hydrazine Arcjets on A2100
Satellites," A/AA Paper 99-2272, June 1999.
19-10. T. Randolph, "Overview of Major U.S. Industrial Programs in Electric
Propulsion," A/AA Paper 99-2160, June 1999.
19-11. R. L. Sackeim and D. C. Byers, "Status and Issues Related to In-Space
Propulsion Systems," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 14, No. 5,
September-October 1998.
19-12. J. R. Beattie, "XIPS Keeps Satellites on Track," The Industrial Physicist, Vol. 4,
No. 2, June 1998.
19-13. J. Wang, D. Brinza, R. Goldstein, J. Polk, M. Henry, D. T. Young, J. J. Hanley,
J. Nodholt, D. Lawrence, and M. Shappirio, "Deep Space One Investigations of
Ion Propulsion Plasma Interactions: Overview and Initial Results," A/AA Paper
99-2971, June 1999.
19-14. P. G. Hill and C. R. Peterson, Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Propulsion,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA, 1992.
710 ELECTRIC PROPULSION
19-15. E. L. Resler, Jr., and W. R. Sears, "Prospects of Magneto-Aerodynamics,"
Journal of Aeronautical Sciences, Vol. 24, No. 4, April 1958, pp. 235-246.
19-16. M. Martinez-Sanchez and J. E. Pollard, "Spacecraft Electric Propulsion~An
Overview," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 14, No. 5, September-October
1998, pp. 688-699.
19-17. C.H. McLean, J.B. Mc Vey, and D. T. Schappell, "Testing of a U.S.-built HET
System for Orbit Transfer Applications," A/AA Paper 99-2574, June 1999.
19-18. V. Kim, "Main Physical Features and Processes Determining the Performance
of Stationary Plasma Thrusters," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 14, No.
5, September-October 1998, pp. 736-743.
19-19. D. Baker, "Mission Design Case Study," in R. W. Humble, G. N. Henry, and
W. J. Larson (Eds.), Space Propulsion Analysis and Design, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1995, Chapter 10.
19-20. J. J. DeBellis, "Optimization Procedure for Electric Propulsion Engines," MS
thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, December 1999, 75 pages.
19-21. J. D. Filliben, "Electric Propulsion for Spacecraft Applications," Chemical
Propulsion Information Agency Report CPTR 96-64, The Johns Hopkins
University, December 1996.
19-22. M. A. Kurtz, H. L. Kurtz, and H. 0. Schrade, "Optimization of Electric
Propulsion Systems Considering Specific Power as a Function of Specific
Impulse," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 4, No. 2, 1988, pp. 512-519.
CHAPTER 20
ROCKET TESTING
20.1. TYPES OF TESTS
Before rocket propulsion systems are put into operational use, they are sub
jected to several different types of tests, some of which are outlined below in
the sequence in which they are normally performed.
I. Manufacturing inspection and fabrication tests on individual parts
(dimensional inspection, pressure tests, x-rays, leak checks, electric con
tinuity, electromechanical checks, etc.).
2. Component tests (functional and operational tests on igniters, valves,
thrusters, controls, injectors, structures, etc.).
3. Static rocket system tests (with complete propulsion system on test
stand): (a) partial or simulated rocket operation (for proper function,
calibration, ignition, operation-often without establishing full thrust
or operating for the full duration); (b) complete propulsion system tests
(under rated conditions, off-design conditions, with intentional varia
tions in environment or calibration). For a reusable or restartable rocket
propulsion system this can include many starts, long-duration endurance
tests, and postoperational inspections and reconditioning.
4. Static vehicle tests (when rocket propulsion system is installed in a
restrained, nonflying vehicle or stage).
5. Flight tests: (a) with a specially instrumented propulsion system m a
developmental flight test vehicle; (b) with a production vehicle.
711
712 ROCKET TESTING
Each of these five types of tests can be performed on at least three basic
types of programs:
1. Research on and development or improvement of a new (or modified)
rocket engine or motor or their propellants or components.
2. Evaluation of the suitability of a new (or modified) rocket engine or
motor for a specified application or for flight readiness.
3. Production and quality assurance of a rocket propulsion system.
The first two types of programs are concerned with a novel or modified
device and often involve the testing and measurement of new concepts or
phenomena using experimental rockets. The testing of a new solid propellant
grain, the development of a novel control valve assembly, and the measurement
of the thermal expansion of a nozzle exhaust cone during firing operation are
examples.
Production tests concern themselves with the measurement of a few basic
parameters on production propulsion systems to assure that the performance,
reliability, and operation are within specified tolerance limits. If the number of
units is large, the test equipment and instrumentation used for these tests are
usually partly or fully automated and designed to permit the testing, measure
ment, recording, and evaluation in a minimum amount of time.
During the early development phases of a program, many special and un
usual tests are performed on components and complete rockets to prove spe
cific design features and performance characteristics. Special facilities and
instrumentation or modification of existing test equipment are used. During
the second type of program, some special tests are usually conducted to deter
mine the statistical performance and reliability of a rocket device by operating
a number of units of the same design. During this phase tests are also made to
demonstrate the ability of the rocket to withstand extreme limits of the oper
ating conditions, such as high and low ambient temperature, variations in fuel
composition, changes in the vibration environment, or exposure to moisture,
rain, vacuum, or rough handling during storage. To demonstrate safety, some
times, intentional malfunctions, spurious signals, or manufacturing flaws are
introduced into the propulsion system, to determine the capability of the con
trol system or the safety devices to handle and prevent a potential failure.
Before an experimental rocket can be flown in a vehicle it usually has to pass
a set of preliminary flight rating tests aimed at demonstrating the rocket's safety,
reliability, and performance. It is not a single test, but a series of tests under
various specified conditions operating limits, and performance tolerances, simu
lated environments, and intentional malfunctions. Thereafter the rocket may be
used in experimental flights. However, before it can be put into production, it
usually has to pass another specified series of tests under a variety of rigorous
specified conditions, known as the qualification test or preproduction test. Once a
particular propulsion system has been qualified, or passed a qualification test, it
is usually forbidden to make any changes in design, fabrication processes, or
20.2. TEST FACILITIES AND SAFEGUARDS 713
materials without going through a careful review, extensive documentation, and
often also a requalification test.
The amount and expense of testing of components and complete propulsion
systems has decreased greatly in the last few decades. The reasons are more
experience with prior similar systems and more confidence in predicting a
number of failure modes and their locations. Validated computer programs
have removed many uncertainties and obviated needs for tests. In some appli
cations the number of firing tests has decreased by a factor of 10 or more.
20.2. TEST FACILITIES AND SAFEGUARDS
For chemical rocket propulsion systems, each test facility usually has the fol
lowing major systems or components:
1. A test cell or test bay where the article to be tested is mounted, usually in
a special test fixture. If the test is hazardous, the test facility must have
provisions to protect operating personnel and to limit damage in case of
an accident.
2. An instrumentation system with associated computers for sensing, main
taining, measuring, analyzing, correcting, and recording various physical
and chemical parameters. It usually includes calibration systems and
timers to accurately synchronize the measurements.
3. A control system for starting, stopping, and changing the operating con
ditions.
4. Systems for handling heavy or awkward assemblies, supplying liquid
propellant, and providing maintenance, security, and safety.
5. For highly toxic propellants and toxic plume gases it has been required to
capture the hazardous gas or vapor (firing inside a closed duct system),
remove almost all of the hazardous ingredients (e.g., by wet scrubbing
and/or chemical treatment), allow the release of the nontoxic portion of
the cleaned gases, and safely dispose of any toxic solid or liquid residues
from the chemical treatment. With an exhaust gas containing fluorine,
for example, the removal of much of this toxic gas can be achieved by
scrubbing it with water that contains dissolved calcium; it will then form
calcium fluoride, which can be precipitated and removed.
6. In some tests specialized test equipment and unique facilities are needed
to conduct static testing under different environmental conditions or
under simulated emergency conditions. For example, high and low ambi
ent temperature tests of large motors may require a temperature-con
trolled enclosure around the motor; a rugged explosion-resistant
facility is needed for bullet impact tests of propellant-loaded missile sys
tems and also for cook-off tests, where gasoline or rocket fuel is burned
with air below a stored missile. Similarly, special equipment is needed for
714 ROCKET TESTING
vibration testing, measuring thrust vector forces and moments in three
dimensions, or determining total impulse for very short pulse durations
at low thrust.
Most rocket propulsion testing is now accomplished in sophisticated facil
ities under closely controlled conditions. Modern rocket test facilities are fre
quently located several miles from the nearest community to prevent or
minimize effects of excessive noise, vibrations, explosions, and toxic exhaust
clouds. Figure 20-1 shows one type of an open-air test stand for vertically
down-firing large liquid propellant thrust chambers (I 00,000 to 2 million
pounds thrust). It is best to fire the propulsion system in a direction (vertical
~ Flashing red warning lights
signalling hazard prior to and
during run.
Green signals all clear; allows
reentry to test stand
Test stand steel beam
structure (5 stories high)
Working platforms for access
to propulsion hardware,
controls, and instruments
Video camera (4)
Water cooling sprays
90° flame deflector bucket
Water sprays
/ (with water cooling jacket)
Instrument
terminal ~
room ... Exhaust gas
mixed with steam
and water
FIGURE 20-1. Simplified sketch of a typical static test stand for a large liquid propel
lant thrust chamber firing vertically downward. Only a small part of the exhaust plume
(between the nozzle exit and flame bucket entrance) is visible. The flame bucket turns
the exhaust gas plume by 90° (horizontal) and prevents the flame from digging a hole in
the ground. Not shown here are cranes, equipment for installing or removing a thrust
chamber, safety railings, high pressure gas tank, the propellant tank pressurization
system, separate storage tanks for fuel, oxidizer, or cooling water with their feed sys
tems, or a small workshop.
20.2. TEST FACILITIES AND SAFEGUARDS 715
or horizontal) similar to the actual flight condition. Figure 20-2 shows a simu
lated altitude test facility for rockets of about 10.5 metric tons thrust force
(46,000 !bf). It requires a vacuum chamber in which to mount the engine, a set
of steam ejectors to create a vacuum, water to reduce the gas temperature, and
a cooled diffuser. With the flow of chemical rocket propellant combustion
gases it is impossible to maintain a high vacuum in these kinds of facilities;
typically, between 15 to 4 torr (20 to 35 km altitude) can be maintained. This
type of test facility allows the operation of rocket propulsion systems with
high-nozzle-area ratios that would normally experience flow separation at
sea-level ambient pressures.
Prior to performing any test, it is common practice to train the test crew and
go through repeated dry runs, to familiarize each person with his or her respon
sibilities and procedures, including the emergency procedures.
Typical personnel and plant security or safety provisions in a modern test
facility include the following:
l. Concrete-walled blockhouse or control stations for the protection of
personnel and instruments (see Fig. 20-3) remote from the actual rocket
propulsion location.
O"·OE
Boiler
Cooling
measurement water
7.8m------------104m-----------
FIGURE 20-2. Simplified diagram of a simulated altitude, horizontal firing test facility
for the LE-5 Japanese-designed thrust chamber (liquid oxygen-liquid hydrogen propel
lants) showing the method of creating a vacuum (6 torr during operation and 13 torr
prior to start). The operating duration is limited to about IO min by the capacity of the
steam storage. (Reproduced from Ref. 20-1 with permission of the AIAA.)
716 ROCKET TESTING
FIGURE 20-3. Control room (inside a reinforced concrete blockhouse) for test opera
tors, instrument recorders, and controls. Note the control console, closed-circuit televi
sion, radio and telephone, direct read-out meters, strip charts, high-speed tape
recorders, oscilloscope, air-quality alarm, and emergency lights. (Courtesy of U.S. Air
Force Phillips Laboratory.)
2. Remote control, indication, and recording of all hazardous operations
and measurements; isolation of propellants from the instrumentation
and control room.
3. Automatic or manual water deluge and fire-extinguishing systems.
4. Closed circuit television systems for remotely viewing the test.
5. Warning signals (siren, bells, horns, lights, speakers) to notify personnel
to clear the test area prior to a test, and an all-clear signal when the
conditions are no longer hazardous.
6. Quantity and distance restrictions on liquid propellant tankage and
solid propellant storage to minimize damage in the event of explosions;
separation of liquid fuels and oxidizers.
7. Barricades around hazardous test articles to reduce shrapnel damage in
the event of a blast.
8. Explosion-proof electrical systems, spark-proof shoes, and nonspark
hand tools to prvent ignition of flammable materials.
9. For certain propellants also safety clothing (see Fig. 20-4), including
propellant- and fire-resistant suits, face masks and shields, gloves, spe
cial shoes, and hard hats.
20.2. TEST FACILITIES AND SAFEGUARDS 717
FIGURE 20-4. Plastic safety suit, gloves, boots, and hood used by test personnel in
handling hazardous or corrosive liquid propellants. Safety shower, which starts auto
matically when a person steps onto the platform, washes away splashed or spilled
propellant. (Official U.S. Air Force photograph.)
10. Rigid enforcement of rules governmg area access, smoking, safety
inspections, and so forth.
11. Limitations on the number of personnel that may be in a hazardous
area at any time.
Monitoring and Control of Toxic Materials
Open-air testing of chemical rockets frequently requires measurement and con
trol of exhaust cloud concentrations and gas movement in the surrounding
areas for safeguarding personnel, animals, and plants. A toxic cloud of gas
and particles can result from the exhaust gas of normal rocket operation,
vapors or reaction gases from unintentional propellant spills, and gases from
fires, explosions, or from the intentional destruction of vehicles in flight or
rockets on the launch stand. Environmental regulations usually limit the max-
718 ROCKET TESTING
imum local concentration or the total quantity of toxic gas or particulates
released to the atmosphere. The toxic nature of some of these liquids, vapors,
and gases has been mentioned in Chapters 7 and 12. One method of control is
for tests with discharges of moderately toxic gases or products to be postponed
until favorable weather conditions are present.
In ground tests, the toxic cloud source is treated as a point source, and in
flight tests it is a ribbon source. The rate of exhaust cloud diffusion is influenced
by many propulsion variables, including propellant, rocket size, exhaust tem
perature, and thrust duration; by many atmospheric variables, including wind
velocity, direction, turbulence, humidity, and vertical stability or lapse rate,
and by the surrounding terrain. Extensive analytical studies and measurements
of the environmental exposure from explosions, industrial smoke, and gases,
and exhausts from missile and space vehicle launchings give background useful
for predicting the atmospheric diffusion and downwind concentrations of
rocket exhaust clouds. Reference 20-2 describes hazards and toxic gas cloud
dispersals and concentrations. Reference 20-3 evaluates the environmental
impact of rocket exhausts from large units on the ozone in the stratosphere
and on the ground weather near the test site; it concludes that the impacts are
generally small and temporary. Reference 20--4 describes a test-area atmo
spheric measuring network.
A widely used relationship for predicting atmospheric diffusion of gas
clouds has been formulated by 0. G. Sutton (Ref. 20-5). Many of the most
modern equations and models relating to downwind concentrations of toxic
clouds are extensions of Sutton's theory. Given below are the Sutton equations
of primary interest to rocket and missile operators.
For instantaneous ground-level point source nonisotropic conditions,
Q - n-2 X 2 + y 2 + Z 2 )] (20-1)
Xcx.y.z,1) = 3/2c C C (- )3(2-nJ/2 exp [ (ut) ( c2 c2 c2
Jr X y z Uf X )' Z
For continuous ground-level point source nonisotropic conditions,
X = 2Q exp [ -xn -2 (- /+ Cz-2 ; )] (20-2)
nCyC2ux2-n C}
where xis the concentration in grams per cubic meter, Q is the source strength
(grams for intantaneous, grams per second for continuous); Cx,y.z are diffusion
coefficients in the x, y, z planes, respectively; u is the average wind velocity in
meters per second, t is the time in seconds, and the coordinates x, y, z are in
meters measured from the center of the moving cloud in the instantaneous case
and from a ground point beneath the plume axis in the continuous case. The
exponent n is a stability or turbulence coefficient, ranging from almost zero for
highly turbulent conditions to l as a limit for extremely stable conditions, and
usually falling between 0.10 and 0.50.
20.2. TEST FACILITIES AND SAFEGUARDS 719
A few definitions basic to the study of atmospheric diffusion of exhaust
clouds are as follows:
I. Micrometeorology. Study and forecasting of atmospheric phenomena
restricted to a region approximately 300 m above the earth's surface
and a horizontal distance of approximately 5 miles.
2. Lapse Rate. The rate of decrease in temperature with increasing height
above the earth's surface. The United States Standard Atmosphere has a
lapse rate of about 6.4°C per 1000 m. Lapse rate is also affected by
altitude, wind, and humidity.
3. Inversion, or Inversion Layer. Condition of negative lapse rate (tempera
ture increases with increasing height). Usually formed near the ground at
night.
The following are a few general rules and observations derived from experi
ence with the atmospheric diffusion of rocket exhaust clouds:
I. Inversion presents a very stable layer and greatly reduces the vertical
dispersion (the higher the lapse rate, the greater the vertical dispersion).
2. A highly stable atmospheric condition tends to keep the exhaust plume or
cloud intact and away from the earth's surface except when the exhaust
products are much heavier than the surrounding air.
3. High wind increases the rate of diffusion and reduces the thermal effects.
4. For short firings ( < 500 sec) the approximate dosages downwind are
about the same as from an instantaneous point source.
5. When the plume reaches about one-fourth the distance to a given point
before emission is stopped, peak concentration will be about three
fourths of that from a continuous source of equal strength.
6. The presence of an inversion layer significantly restricts the mixing or
diffusion capacity of the atmosphere in that the effective air mass is that
mass existing between the earth's surface and the inversion layer.
7. Penetration of the inversion layer due to the buoyance force of the hot
exhaust cloud seldom occurs.
8. Earth surface dosage drops rapidly when missiles or space launch vehi
cles are destroyed in flight above a height of 1500 m as compared to lower
altitudes of 600 to 1000 m.
Interpretation of the hazard that exists once the concentration of the toxic
agent is known also requires knowledge of its effects on the human body,
plants, and animals. Tolerance limits for humans are given in Chapter 7 and
in Ref. 8~5. There are usually three limits of interest: one for the short-time
exposure of the general public, one for an 8-hr exposure limit, and an evacua
tion concentration. Depending on the toxic chemical, the 8-hr limit may vary
from 5000 ppm for a gas such as carbon dioxide, to less than I ppm for an
extremely toxic substance such as fluorine. Poisoning of the human body by
720 ROCKET TESTING
exhaust products usually occurs from inhalation of the gases and fine solid
particles, but the solid residuals that sometimes remain around a test facility
for weeks or months following a test firing can enter the body through cuts and
other avenues. Also, certain liquid propellants cause burns and skin rash or are
poisonous when ingested, as explained in Chapter 7.
20.3. INSTRUMENTATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT
This section gives only a very brief discussion of this subject. For further study
the reader is referred to standard textbooks on instruments and computers
used in testing, such as Ref. 20-6. Some of the physical quantities measured
in rocket testing are as follows:
1. Forces (thrust, thrust vector control side forces, short thrust pulses).
2. Flows (hot and cold gases, liquid fuel, liquid oxidizer, leakage).
3. Pressures (chamber, propellant, pump, tank, etc.).
4. Temperatures (chamber walls, propellant, structure, nozzle).
5. Timing and command sequencing of valves, switches, igniters, etc.
6. Stresses, strains, and vibrations (combustion chamber, structures, pro
pellant lines, accelerations of vibrating parts) (Ref. 20-7).
7. Time sequence of events (ignition, attainments of full pressure).
8. Movement and position of parts (valve stems, gimbal position, deflection
of parts under load or heat).
9. Voltages, frequencies, and currents in electrical or control subsystems.
10. Visual observations (flame configuration, test article failures, explosions)
using high-speed cameras or video cameras.
11. Special quantities such as turbopump shaft speed, liquid levels in pro
pellant tanks, burning rates, flame luminosity, or exhaust gas composi
tion.
Reference 20-8 gives a description of specialized diagnostic techniques used
in propulsion systems, such as using nonintrusive optical methods, micro
waves, and ultrasound for measurements of temperatures, velocities, particle
sizes, or burn rates in solid propellant grains. Many of these sensors incorpo
rate specialized technologies and, often, unique software. Each of the measured
parameters can be obtained by different types of instruments, sensors, and
analyzers, as indicated in Ref. 20-9.
Measurement System Terminology
Each measurement or each measuring system usually requires one or more
sensing elements (often called transducers or pickups), a device for recording,
displaying, and/or indicating the sensed information, and often also another
20.3. INSTRUMENTATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT 721
device for conditioning, amplifying, correcting, or transforming the sensed signal
into the form suitable for recording, indicating, display, or analysis. Recording
of rocket test data has been performed in several ways, such as on chart
recorders or in digital form on memory devices, such as on magnetic tapes or
disks. Definitions of several significant terms are given below and in Ref. 20-6.
Range refers to the region extending from the minimum to the maximum
rated value over which the measurement system will give a true and linear
response. Usually an additional margin is provided to permit temporary over
loads without damage to the instrument or need for recalibration.
Errors in measurements are usually of two types: (I) human errors of im
properly reading the instrument, chart, or record and of improperly interpret
ing or correcting these data, and (2) instrument or system errors, which usually
fall into four classifications: static errors, dynamic response errors, drift errors,
and hysteresis errors (see Ref. 20-10). Static errors are usually fixed errors due
to fabrication and installation variations; these errors can usually be detected
by careful calibration, and an appropriate correction can then be applied to the
reading. Drift error is the change in output over a period of time, usually
caused by random wander and environmental conditions. To avoid drift
error the measuring system has to be calibrated at frequent intervals at stan
dard environmental conditions against known standard reference values over
its whole range. Dynamic response errors occur when the measuring system fails
to register the true value of the measured quantity while this quantity is chang
ing, particularly when it is changing rapidly. For example, the thrust force has
a dynamic component due to vibrations, combustion oscillations, interactions
with the support structure, etc. These dynamic changes can distort or amplify
the thrust reading unless the test strand structure, the rocket mounting struc
ture, and the thrust measuring and recording system are properly designed to
avoid harmonic excitation or excessive energy damping. To obtain a good
dynamic response requires a careful analysis and design of the total system.
A maximum frequency response refers to the maximum frequency (usually in
cycles per second) at which the instrument system will measure true values. The
natural frequency of the measuring system is usually above the limiting
response frequency. Generally, a high-frequency response requires more com
plex and expensive instrumentation. All of the instrument system (sensing
elements, modulators, and recorders) must be capable of a fast response.
Most of the measurements in rocket testing are made with one of two types
of instruments: those made under nearly steady static conditions, where only
relatively gradual changes in the quantities occur, and those made with fast
transient conditions, such as rocket starting, stopping, or vibrations (see Ref.
20-11 ). This latter type of instrument has frequency responses above 200 Hz,
sometimes as high as 20,000 Hz. These fast measurements are necessary to
evaluate the physical phenomena of rapid transients.
Linearity of the instrument refers to the ratio of the input (usually pressure,
temperature, force, etc.) to the output (usually voltage, output display change,
etc.) over the range of the instrument. Very often the static calibration error
722 ROCKET TESTING
indicates a deviation from a truly linear response. A nonlinear response can
cause appreciable errors in dynamic measurements. Resolution refers to the
minimum change in the measured quantity that can be detected with a given
instrument. Dead zone or hysteresis errors are often caused by energy absorp
tion within the instrument system or play in the instrument mechanism; in part,
they limit the resolution of the instrument.
Sensitivity refers to the change in response or reading caused by special
influences. For example, the temperature sensitivity and the acceleration sensi
tivity refer to the change in measured value caused by temperature and accel
eration. These are usually expressed in percent change of measured value per
unit of temperature or acceleration. This information can serve to correct
readings to reference or standard conditions.
Errors in measurement can arise from many sources. Reference 20-12 gives
a standardized method, including mathematical models, for estimating the
error, component by component, as well as the cumulative effect in the instru
mentation and recording systems. Graphic recordings (error ranges ±0.2 to
±0.5% of strip chart span) and oscillographs (error ranges ±2.0 to ±3.0% of
full scale), two of the analog-type recording devices, are used for giving quick
look data and to record high-frequency data or transient conditions; these
transients are beyond the capability of digital recorders, which are usually
limited to 100 Hz or lower as compared to 5000 Hz or higher for oscillographs.
Electrical interference or "noise" within an instrumentation system, includ
ing the power supply, transmission lines, amplifiers, and recorders, can affect
the accuracy of the recorded data, especially when low-output transducers are
in use. Methods for measuring and eliminating objectionable electrical noise
are given in Ref. 20-13.
Use of Computers
Computers have become commonplace in the testing and handling of data in
rocket propulsion. They are usually coupled with sensors (e.g., pressure trans
ducers, actuator position indicators, temperature sensors, liquid level gauges,
etc.), which provide the data inputs, with controllers (valve actuators, thrust
vector controllers, thrust termination devices), which receive commands result
ing from the computer outputs causing a change in the sensed quantity, and
with auxiliaries such as terminals, data storage devices, or printers. Computers
are used in one or more of the following ways:
l. The analysis of test data becomes a time-consuming difficult job without
computers, simply because of the huge volume of data that is generated
in many typical rocket propulsion system tests. All the pertinent data
need to be reviewed and evaluated. The computer will permit automated
data reduction, including data correction (e.g., for known instrument
error, calibration, or changes in atmospheric pressure), conversion of
analog data into digital form, and filtering of data to eliminate signals
20.3. INSTRUMENTATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT 723
outside the range of interest. It can also include data manipulation to put
the test information into graphic displays or summary hard-copy read
outs of selected, specific performance parameters.
On the basis of a careful evaluation of the test data the responsible
engineers have to decide whether the test objectives were met and what
changes to make or what objectives to set for the next test or the remain
der of the current test. Reference 20-14 describes a software system that
allows automated test analysis and decision support in evaluating the 50
million bytes of test data that are generated in a typical SSME test; it is
based in part on the use of an expert knowledge system.
2. Modern testing systems use digital data bases for recording and docu
menting test records. Often only a portion of the recorded data is actually
analyzed and reviewed during or after the test. In complex rocket pro
pulsion system tests, sometimes between 100 or 400 different instrument
measurements are made and recorded. Some data need to be sampled
frequently (e.g., some transients may be sampled at rates higher than
1000 times per second), whereas other data need to be taken at lower
frequencies (e.g., temperature of mounting structure may be needed only
every l to 10 sec). Multiplexing of data is commonly practiced to simplify
data transmission. Most rocket test computer systems contain a config
uration file to indicate data characteristics for each channel, such as
range, gain, the references, the type of averaging, the parameter charac
teristics, or the data correction algorithms. Most of the data are not
analyzed or printed out as hard copy; a detailed analysis occurs only if
there is reason for understanding particular test events in more detail.
This analysis may occur months after the actual tests and may not even
be done on the same computer.
3. Sensing and evaluating failures or overlimit conditions (excessive local
temperature, vibration, or limiting local pressure) is aimed at detecting
an impending malfunction and at deciding whether it is a serious prob
lem. If serious, it can cause either an automatic correction or an auto
matic and safe shutdown of operation. Sensing of undesirable operating
conditions can be accomplished much more rapidly on a computer than
would be possible if a human operator were in the control loop. In some
engine designs a critical failure is sensed by several sensors and the com
puter rapidly evaluates the signals from these sensors and causes a cor
rection (or shutdown) only if the majority of sensors indicate an unsafe
or undesirable condition, thus eliminating the occasional failure of an
individual sensor as a cause for shutdown.
4. Simulation of tests can be accomplished by devising algorithms that allow
a computer to respond in a manner similar to a rocket propulsion unit.
The computer receives inputs from various sensors (valve position, thrust
vector control position, unsafe temperatures, etc.), processes the data in a
simulation algorithm, and then provides output of control signals (e.g.,
724 ROCKET TESTING
thrust change, shutdown) and also of simulated rocket performance (e.g.,
chamber pressure, specific impulse, side force, etc.). This computer simu
lation can be very economical compared to running additional tests. This
can be a full off-line simulation (in a separate computer with simulated
inputs) or a partial on-line simulation where the computer is coupled to
an actual rocket engine or its components; this second type can be used
to check out an engine just prior to, or in the first second of, a test run or
test flight.
5. Control of test operation by computer allows the attainment of the desired
test conditions in a minimum amount of time. This could entail a pre
programmed set of pulses for an attitude control thruster, a desired set of
different mixture ratios to be achieved for a short time (say, I sec each) in
a single test, or a planned variation of thrust vector control conditions. It
can provide a closed loop control to attain desired operating conditions,
including the paths along which these conditions should be achieved. It
also makes it possible to control several variables at the same time (e.g.,
thrust, mixture ratio, and several turbine inlet temperatures). For some
component tests programmable logic controllers are used to control the
test operation instead of a computer, which usually requires some soft
ware development.
In a multiple-static-test facility there can be a group of network-con
nected computers and databases to achieve some or all of the functions
above. Some of the computer hardware would be part of the test article,
some part of the test facility, and some can be located remotely and
linked by a communications network. Reference 20-15 describes the
engine control and computer system for the Space Shuttle main engine.
20.4. FLIGHT TESTING
Flight testing of rocket propulsion systems is always conducted in conjunction
with tests of vehicles and other systems such as guidance, vehicle controls, or
ground support. These flights usually occur along missile and space launch
ranges, sometimes over the ocean. If a flight test vehicle deviates from its
intended path and appears to be headed for a populated area, a range safety
official (or a computer) will have to either cause a destruction of the vehicle,
abort the flight, or cause it to correct its course. Many propulsion systems
therefore include devices that will either terminate the operation (shut off the
rocket engine or open thrust termination openings into rocket motor cases as
described in Chapter 13) or trigger explosive devices that will cause the vehicle
(and therefore also the propulsion system) to disintegrate in flight.
Flight testing requires special launch support equipment, means for obser
ving, monitoring, and recording data (cameras, radar, telemetering, etc.),
equipment for assuring range safety and for reducing data and evaluating flight
20.5. POSTACCIDENT PROCEDURES 725
test performance, and specially trained personnel. Different launch equipment
is needed for different kinds of vehicles. This includes launch tubes for
shoulder-held infantry support missile launchers, movable turret-type mounted
multiple launchers installed on an army truck or a navy ship, a transporter for
larger missiles, and a track-propelled launch platform or fixed complex launch
pads for spacecraft launch vehicles. The launch equipment has to have provi
sions for loading or placing the vehicle into a launch position, for allowing
access of various equipment and connections to launch support equipment
(checkout, monitoring, fueling, etc.), for aligning or aiming the vehicle, or
for withstanding the exposure to the hot rocket plume at launch.
During experimental flights extensive measurements are often made on the
behavior of the various vehicle subsystems; for example, rocket propulsion
parameters, such as chamber pressure, feed pressures, temperatures, and so
on, are measured and the data are telemetered and transmitted to a ground
receiving station for recording and monitoring. Some flight tests rely on salva
ging and examining the test vehicle.
20.5. POSTACCIDENT PROCEDURES
In the testing of any rocket propulsion system there will invariably be failures,
particularly when some of the operating parameters are close to their limit.
With each failure comes an opportunity to learn more about the design, the
materials, the propulsion performance, the fabrication methods, or the test
procedures. A careful and thorough investigation of each failure is needed to
learn the likely causes and identify the remedies or fixes to prevent a similar
failure in the future. The lessons to be learned from these failures are perhaps
the most important benefits of testing. A formalized postaccident approach is
often used, particularly if the failure had a major impact, such as high cost,
major damage, or personnel injury. A major failure (e.g., the loss of a space
launch vehicle or severe damage to a test facility) often causes the program to
be stopped and further testing or flights put on hold until the cause of the
failure is determined and remedial action has been taken to prevent a recur
rence.
Of utmost concern immediately after a major failure are the steps that need
to be taken to respond to the emergency. This includes giving first aid to
injured personnel, bringing the propulsion system and/or the test facilities to
a safe, stable condition, limiting further damage from chemical hazards to the
facility or the environment, working with local fire departments, medical or
emergency maintenance staff or ambulance personnel, and debris clearing
crews, and quickly providing factual statements to the management, the
employees, the news media, and the public. It also includes controlling access
to the facility where the failure has occurred and preserving evidence for the
subsequent investigation. All test personnel, particularly the supervisory peo
ple, need to be trained not only in preventing accidents and minimizing the
726 ROCKET TESTING
impact of a potential failure, but also how to best respond to the emergency.
Reference 20-16 suggests postaccident procedures involving rocket propel
lants.
REFERENCES
20-1. K. Yanagawa, T. Fujita, H. Miyajima, and K. Kishimoto, "High Altitude
Simulation Tests of LOX-LH2 Engine LE-5," Journal ol Propulsion and
Power, Vol. I, No. 3, May-June 1985, pp. 180-186.
20-2. "Handbook for Estimating Toxic Fuel Hazards," NASA Report CR-61326,
April 1970.
20-3. R. R. Bennett and A. J. McDonald, "Recent Activities and Studies on the
Environmental Impact of Rocket Effluents," AIAA Paper 98-3850, July 1998.
20--4. R. J. Grosch, "Micro-Meteorological System," Report TR-68-37, Air Force
Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, November 1968 (AD 678856).
20-5. 0. G. Sutton, Micrometeorology, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York,
1973, Chapter 8.
20-6. D. Ramsey, Principles of Engineering Instrumentation, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1996.
20-7. K. G. McConnell, Vibration Testing: Theory and Practice, Wiley Interscience,
New York, 1995.
20-8. Y. M. Timnat, "Diagnostic Techniques for Propulsion Systems," Progress in
Aerospace Sciences, Vol. 26, No. 2, 1989, pp. 153-168.
20-9. R. S. Figliola and D. B. Beasley, Theory and Design for Mechanical
Measurements, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1991, 516 pages.
20-10. R. Cerri, "Sources of Measurement Error in Instrumentation Systems," Preprint
19-LA-61, Instrument Society of America, Research Triangle Park, NC.
20-11. P. M. J. Hughes and E. Cerny, "Measurement and Analysis of High-Frequency
Pressure Oscillations in Solid Rocket Motors," Journal of Spacecraft and
Rockets, Vol. 21, No. 3, May-June 1984, pp. 261-265.
20-12. Handbook for Estimating the Uncertainty in Measurements Made with Liquid
Propellant Rocket Engine Systems, Handbook 180, Chemical Propulsion
Information Agency, April 30, 1969 (AD 855130).
20-13. "Grounding Techniques for the Minimization of Instrumentation Noise
Problems," Report TR-65-8, Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory,
January 1965 (AD 458129).
20-14. R. C. Heim and K. J. Slusser, "The Measure of Engine Performance,"
Threshold, The Boeing Company, Rocketdyne Propulsion & Power, Summer
1994, pp. 40--48.
20-15. R. M. Mattox and J.B. White, "Space Shuttle Main Engine Controller," NASA
TP-1932, 1981.
20-16. D. K. Shaver and R. L. Berkowitz, Post-accident Procedures for Chemicals and
Propellants, Noyes Publications, Park Ridge, NJ, 1984.
APPENDIX 1
CONVERSION FACTORS AND
CONSTANTS
Conversion Factors (arranged alphabetically)
Acceleration (L c2)*
1 m/sec2 = 3.2808 ft/sec2 = 39.3701 in./sec2
1 ft/sec2 = 0.3048 m/sec2 = 12.0 in./sec2
g = 9.80665 m/sec2 = 32.174 ft/sec2 (standard gravity pull at earth's surface)
0
Area (L2 )
1 ft2 = 144.0 in.2 = 0.092903 m2
1 m2 = 1550.0 in.2 = 10.7639 ft2
1 in.2 = 6.4516 x 10-4 m2
Density (M L3 )
Specific gravity is dimensionless, but has the same numerical value as density
expressed in g/cm3 or kg/m3
1 kg/m3 = 6.24279 x 10-2 lbm/ft3 = 3.61273 x 10-5 lbm/in.3
1 lbm/ft3 = 16.0184 kg/m3
1 lbm/in.3 = 2.76799 x 104 kg/m3
*The letters in parentheses after each heading indicate the dimensional parameters (L = length,
M = mass, t = time, and T = temperature).
727
728 APPENDIX 1
Energy, also Work or Heat (M L2 C2 )
1.0 Btu = 1055.056 J (joule)
1.0 kW-hr = 3.60059 x 106 J
1.0 ft-lbf = 1.355817 J
1.0 cal= 4.1868 J
1.0 kcal= 4186.8 J
Force (M L C2 )
1.0 !bf= 4.448221 N
I dyne= 10-5 N
1.0 kg (force) [used in Europe] = 9.80665 N
1.0 ton (force) [used in Europe] = 1000 kg (force)
1.0 N = 0.2248089 !bf
1.0 millinewton (mN) = 10-3 N
Weight is the force on a mass being accelerated by gravity (g applies at the
0
surface of the earth)
Length (L)
I m = 3.2808 ft= 39.3701 in.
I ft= 0.3048 m = 12.0 in.
I in. = 2.540 cm = 0.0254 m
I mile= 1.609344 km= 1609.344 m = 5280.0 ft
I nautical mile = 1852.00 m
I mil = 0.0000254 m = 1.00 x 10-3 in.
I micron (µm) = 10-6 m
I astronomical unit (au) = 1.49600 x 1011 m
Mass (M)
I slug = 32.174 lbm
I kg = 2.205 lbm = 1000 g
I lbm = 16 ounces = 0.4536 kg
Power (M L 2 C3 )
I Btu/sec = 0.2924 W (watt)
I J/sec = 1.0 W = 0.001 kW
I cal/sec = 4.186 W
I horsepower = 550 ft-lbf/sec = 745.6998 W
I ft-lbf/sec = 1.35581 W
Pressure (M L -I C2 )
I bar= 105 N/m2 = 0.10 MPa
I atm = 0.101325 MPa = 14.696 psia
APPENDIX 1 729
I mm of mercury = 13.3322 N/m2
I MPa = 106 N/m2
I psi or !bf/in. 2 = 6894. 757 N/m2
Speed ( or linear velocity) (L C 1 )
I ft/sec= 0.3048 m/sec = 12.00 in./sec
I m/sec = 3.2808 ft/sec= 39.3701 in./sec
I knot= 0.5144 m/sec
I mile/hr= 0.4770 m/sec
Specific Heat (L2 C2 T-1 )
I g-cal/g-°C = I kg-cal/kg-K = I Btu/lbm-°F = 4.186 J/g-°C =
1.163 x 10-3 kW-hr/kg-K
Temperature (T)
I K = 9/5 R = 1.80 R
0°C = 273.15 K
0°F = 459.67 R
+
C = (5/9)(F - 32) F = (9/5)C 32
Time (t)
I mean solar day = 24 hr = 1440 min = 86,400 sec
I calendar year = 365 days = 3.1536 x 107 sec
Viscosity (M L-1 t-1 )
I centistoke = 1.00 x I o-6 m2 /sec
I centipoise = 1.00 x 10-3 kg/m sec
I lbf-sec/ft2 = 47.88025 kg/m sec
Constants
J Mechanical equivalent of heat = 4.186 joule/cal = 777.9 ft-lbf/Btu
= I 055 joule/Btu
R' Universal gas constant= 8314.3 J/kg-mole-K =
1545 ft-lbf/lbm-mole-R
Vmole Molecular volume of an ideal gas = 22.41 liter/kg-mole at standard
conditions
e Electron charge= 1.6021176 x 10-19 coulomb
Eo Permittivity of vacuum = 8.854187 x 10-12 farad/m
Gravitational constant = 6.673 x 10-11 m3 /kg-sec
Boltzmann's constant 1.38065003 x 10-23 J j°K
Electron mass 9.109381 x 10-31 kg
Avogadro's number 6.022142 x 1026/kg-mol
CJ Stefan-Boltzman constant 5.6696 x 10-s W /m2-K-4
APPENDIX 2
PROPERTIES OF THE EARTH'S
STANDARD ATMOSPHERE
Sea level pressure is 0.101325 MPa (or 14.696 psia or 1.000 atm).
Altitude (m) Temperature (K) Pressure Ratio Density (kg/m3 )
0 (sea level) 288.150 1.0000 1.2250
1,000 281.651 8.8700 X 10-I 1.1117
3,000 268.650 6.6919 X 10-I 9.0912 X 10-I
5,000 255.650 5.3313 X 10-I 7.6312x 10-1
10,000 223.252 2.6J5J X 10-I 4.J35J X 10-I
25,000 221.552 2.5158 X 10-2 4.0084 X 10-2
50,000 270.650 7.8735 X 10-4 J.0269 X 10-3
75,000 206.650 2.0408 X 10-5 3.4861 X 10-5
100,000 195.08 3.1593 X 10-7 5.604 X 10-7
130,000 469.27 J.2341 X 10-S 8.152 X 10-9
160,000 696.29 2.9997 X 10-9 J.233 X 10-9
200,000 845.56 8.3628 X 10-IO 2.541 X 10-IO
300,000 976.01 8.6557 X 10-II J.916 X 10-II
400,000 995.83 J.4328 X 10-I I 2.803 X 10-12
600,000 999.85 8.1056 X 10-l3 2.137 X 10-l3
1,000,000 1000.00 7.4155 X 10-l4 3.561 X l0-l5
Source: U.S. Standard Atmosphere, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, and U.S. Air Force, Washington, DC, 1976 (NOAA-S/T-
1562).
730
APPENDIX 3
SUMMARY OF KEY EQUATIONS FOR
IDEAL CHEMICAL ROCKETS
Equation
Parameter Equations Numbers
Average exhaust velocity, V2 = C - (pl - p3)A2/1n 2-16
v2 (m/sec or ft/sec) When p 2 = p 3, v2 = c
(assume that v = 0)
1 v2 = j[2k/(k- l)]RT,[1 - (p2/P1)<k-lJ/k] 3-16
3-15
= /2(h1 -h2)
Effective exhaust velocity, c =C CF=F/m=l.,g0 3-32
c (m/sec or ft/sec) C = V2 + (p2 - p3)Aifri1 2-16
Thrust, F (N or !bf) F = cri1 = cmp/tp 2-17
F = CFp1A, 3-31
F = mv2 + (p2 - p3)A2 2-14
F = ml_,g0 = I., ii'
Characteristic c' = c/CF =p,A,/m 3-32
velocity, c'
jkRT
(m/sec or ft/sec) c* = -=======1= === 3-32
kj[2/(k + l)](k+l)/(k-1)
3-32, 3-33
c' =!,go/CF= F /(mCF)
Thrust coefficient, CF
(d imensionless) CF= c/c' = F/(p1A,) 3-31, 3-32
CF= 2k2 (~2-)(k+l)/(k-!)[1 _ (!!2)(k-l)/k]
k- I k + I V1
+p2-p3A2 3-30
P1 A,
Total impulse I, = f F dt = Ft = I, w 2-1, 2-2, 2-5
Specific impulse, {, (sec) I,= c/go = c'CFfgo
2-5
I,= F/mgo = Fj,i·
I,= V2/go + (p2 - p3)Ai/(ri,go) 2-16
2--4, 2-5
I,= l,/(mpg0) = l,/w
731
732 APPENDIX 3
Equation
Parameter Equations Numbers
Propellant mass fraction, 2-8, 2-9
(dimensionless)
(=l-~ 4--4
Mass ratio of vehicle or = nzr = 2-7
~ 1110 -mp
stage,~ (dimensionless) 1110 mo
= mrf(mr + mp)
Vehicle velocity increase in m t;.0 u = = m -cr + ln m ~p = c In mo 42 --1 60
gravity-free vacuum, t;.v 1111 4--5, 4-6
(m/sec or ft/sec) = c ln m 0/(m 0 - mp)
(assume that v = 0) = c ln(mp + mr)/m1
0
Propellant mass flow rate, 1i1 = Av/V = A1v1/V1
m (kg/sec or lb/sec) = Av/V = A21·2/V2 3-24
1 1 1
1i1 = F/c = p 1A 1/c* 2-17, 3-31
3-24
1n = mp/Ip
Mach number, M M = v/a 3-ll
(dimensionless) = v/JkRT
At throat, c = a and M = l.O
Nozzle area rate, E E = AifA 1 3-19
~---------
k _ l ']lk+l)/lk-1)
l l +-2~M:;_ 3-14
E = M 2 [ l+-k 2- ~l
Isentropic flow relationships To/T = (po/Plk-li/k = (V/Voik-ll 3-7
for stagnation and T,/T, = (p,/p,)1k-ll/k = (V,/V,f-1
free-stream conditions
Satellite velocity, u,, in v., = RoJgo/(Ro + h) 4--26
circular orbit
(m/sec or ft/sec)
Escape velocity, v, 4-25
(m/sec or ft/sec)
Liquid propellant engine ,. = m 0/n1 1 6--l
mixture ratio r and m=mo+mr 6--2
propellant flow ti1 mr = 1i1/(r+ l) 6--4
m0 = nn/(r + l) 6--3
Average density Pav for (o r PoP1(r+ l) 7-2
Pav=---
average specific gravity) rpf +Po
Characteristic chamber L* = V,/A 8-9
1
length L*
Solid propellant mass flow ll-l
rate m
Solid propellant burning r=ap1 l l-3
{
rater
Ratio of burning area Ah lH4
to throat area A
1
Temperature
(JP=
7l (" 8, T. )
P
l l--4
sensitivity of burning rate at
constant pressure
Temperature sensitivity of l l-5
pressure at constant K
APPENDIX 4
DERIVATION OF HYBRID FUEL
REGRESSION RATE EQUATION IN
CHAPTER 15
Terry A. Boardman
Listed below is an approach for analyzing hybrid fuel regression, based on a
simplified model of heat transfer in a turbulent boundary layer. This approach,
first developed by Marxman and Gilbert (see Ref. 15-9), assumes that the
combustion port boundary layer is divided into two regions separated by a
thin flame zone. Above the flame zone the flow is oxidizer rich, while below the
flame zone the flow is fuel rich (see Fig. 15-7). An expression is developed to
relate fuel regression rate to heat transfer from the flame to the fuel surface.
For the definition of the symbols in this appendix, please see the list of symbols
in Chapter 15.
Figure A4-l illustrates a simplified picture of the energy balance at the fuel
grain surface. Neglecting radiation and in-depth conduction in the fuel mass,
the steady-sate surface energy balance becomes
(A4-l)
where Qc is the energy transferred to the fuel surface by convection, and PJ, r,
and hv are respectively the solid fuel density, surface regression rate, and over
all fuel heat of vaporization or decomposition. At the fuel surface the heat
transferred by convection equals that transferred by conduction, so that
. arJ
Qs = h/1T = Kgoy- (A4-2)
y=O
where h is the convective heat transfer film coefficient, 11 T is the temperature
difference between the flame zone and the fuel surface, Kg is the gas phase
conductivity, and oT /oyJi.=o is the local boundary layer temperature gradient
evaluated at the fuel surface. The central problem in determining the hybrid
fuel regression rate is thereby reduced to determining the basic aerothermal
733
734 APPENDIX 4
Combustion port oxidizer flow----
Boundary layer edge
u . K aT
Qr gay
~/J///////t'.///1:////////////// Flame zone
f _-,
T r- _ --:- t>,.T= Tp-Ts
I Ptrh] I
General steady-state energy balance:
Energy input fuel surface = Energy out of fuel surface
Oconvection + O,adiation in = Oconduction out + Qphase change + O,adiation out
h to,. T or Kg aa yT I
Y=O
+ acgaT F4 = Kt a a yT + Pt'· h V + Esa T s4
Neglecting radiation and solid phase heat conduction
aaT l
=
·
Kg PtThv
y y=O
FIGURE A4-l. Energy Balance at Fuel Grain Surface.
properties of the boundary layer. Approximate solutions to the flat plate
boundary layer problem are well established (Ref. A4-l) and show that the
heat transfer coefficient at the wall (in this case, the fuel surface) is related to
the skin friction coefficient via the following relationship (called Reynolds'
analogy)
(A4-3)
c
where is the skin friction coefficient with blowing (defined in this case as the
1
evolution of vaporized fuel from the fuel surface and proportional to pv eval
uated at the fuel surface), C1, is the Stanton number, and Pr is the Prandtl
number (Stanton, Prandtl, and Reynolds number definitions are summarized
in Table A4-l). Furthermore, the Stanton number can be written in terms of
the heat flux to the fuel surface as
(A4-4)
APPENDIX 4 735
TABLE A4-1. Dimensionless Numbers Used in Hybrid Boundary Layer Analysis
Parameter Definition Comment
h
Stanton number, C1, Dimensionless heat transfer
coefficient
Ratio of momentum transport via
Prandtl number, Pr
molecular diffusion to energy
transport by diffusion
Ratio of gas inertial forces to
Reynolds number, Rex PeUeX
viscous forces (x is distance from
leading edge of fuel grain)
where t;.h is the enthalpy difference between the flame zone and the fuel sur
face, and Pe, ue are the density and velocity of oxidizer at the edge of the
boundary layer. Combining Equations A4-l, A4-3, and A4-4, the regression
rate of the fuel surface can be written as
(A4-5)
From boundary layer theory, one can show that the skin friction coefficient
without blowing (CJ;) is related to the local Reynolds number by the relation
C
{
0 = 0.0296Re;0 ·2 (A4-6)
Experiments (Ref. A4-2) conducted to determine the effect of blowing on skin
friction coefficients have shown that Cr is related to Cr by the following
0
C
_L = 1.2713-0 77 (5 ::: f3 ::: 100) (A4-7)
Clo
where the blowing coefficient f3 is defined as
(A4-8)
In a turbulent boundary layer, the Prandtl number is very nearly equal to 1.
It can be shown that for Pr = 1, f3, as defined in Eq. A4-8, is also equal to
t;.h/ hv (see Appendix 5). Noting that PeUe is the definition of oxidizer mass
velocity (G), Eq. A4-5 can be written in the final form as
Gos o 2
; = 0.036-(i!_) · f3°·23 (A4-9)
PJ X
736 APPENDIX 4
The coefficient 0.036 applies when the quantities are expressed in the English
Engineering system of units as given in the list of symbols at the end of Chapter
15. In some hybrid motors, radiation may be a significant contributor to the
total fuel surface heat flux. Such motors include those with metal additives to
the fuel grain (such as aluminum) or motors in which soot may be present in
significant concentrations in the combustion chamber. In these instances, Eq.
A4--l must be modified to account for heat flux from a radiating particle cloud.
The radiative contribution affects surface blowing, and hence the convective
heat flux as well, so that one cannot simply add the radiative term to Eq. A4--l.
Instead, one can show (Ref. A4--3) that the total heat flux to the fuel surface
(and hence the fuel regression rate) is expressed by
Q. - p r"h - Q. e-Qcad!Q, + Q (A4-10)
s-'f .-- c rad
which reduces to Eq. A4--l if Qrad = 0. The radiation heat flux has been
hypothesized to have the following form
(A4-ll)
where the term I - e-AC: is t:g, the emissivity of particle-laden gas. Here, a is
the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, a is the fuel surface absorptivity, A is the
particle cloud attenuation coefficient, C is the particle cloud concentration
(number density), and z is the radiation path length. By assuming that the
particle cloud concentration is proportional to chamber pressure and the opti
cal path length is proportional to port diameter, experimenters (see Ref. 15-14)
have approximated the functional dependencies of Eq. A4--l l for correlating
metallized fuel grain regression rates with expressions of the following form
(A4-12)
REFERENCES
A4--l. H. Schlichting, "Boundary Layer Theory," Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1955.
A4--2. L. Lees, "Convective Heat Transfer with Mass Addition and Chemical
Reactions," Combustion and Propulsion, Third AGARD Colloquium, New
York, Pergamon Press, 1958, p. 451.
A4--3. G. A. Marxman, E. E. Woldridge, and R. J. Muzzy, "Fundamentals of Hybrid
Boundary Layer Combustion," A/AA Paper 63-505, December 1963.
APPENDIX 5
ALTERNATIVE INTERPRETATIONS OF
BOUNDARY LAYER BLOWING
COEFFICIENT IN CHAPTER 15
Terry A. Boardman
The blowing coefficient f3 is an important parameter affecting boundary layer
heat transfer. It is interesting to note that, although it is defined as the non
dimensional fuel mass flow rate per unit area normal to the fuel surface, it is
also a thermochemical parameter equivalent to the nondimensional enthalpy
difference between the fuel surface and the flame zone. In terms of the fuel
mass flux, f3 is defined as
(A5-l)
For the definition of the letter symbols please refer to the list of symbols of
Chapter 15. Noting that Cr/2 = C1, Pr-213, Eq. A5-l can be rewritten as
(A5-2)
Recalling that the heat flux at the fuel surface is
Qs = h(Tr - T,) (A5-3)
and that the definition of Stanton number is
(A5-4)
Eq. A5-4 can be rewritten as
737
738 APPENDIX 5
(A5-5)
From energy balance considerations, heat flux to the fuel surface in steady state
is equivalent to
(A5---{5)
so that Eq. A5-2 becomes
(A5-7)
r
Since (pv)., = p at the fuel surface, the fuel regression rate, Eq. A5-7, becomes
1
As has been previously stated, the Prandtl number in a turbulent boundary
layer is very nearly equal to 1 so that the final form for the blowing coefficient
IS
Thus, the blowing coefficient is shown to describe the nondimensional enthalpy
difference between the fuel surface and flame zone, as well as the nondimen
sional fuel surface regression rate.
INDEX
Abbreviations and acronyms for chemical Ammonium perchlorate (AP), 189, 190,
ingredients of solid propellants, 424, 482, 483, 484, 485, 486, 496, 522,
495--497 594-599; see also Particle size
Ablative cooling and materials, 273, 305, parameter
558, 561-563* Apogee, definition, 121
Acceleration of vehicle, terminal, Applications of plume technology, 640
113 Application of rockets, 15-25, 198, 422,
Acoustic velocity, see Velocity of sound 580-582, 663-664, 700--702
Acoustic absorbers, cavities, 358, 359 Apsidal drift, 126--127
Action time, see Burning time and action Arcjet, see Electric propulsion
time Area ratio of nozzle, see Nozzle
Aerodynamic forces, see Drag; Lift Atlas space launch vehicle, 18
Aerojet AJ-10--1181 rocket engine, 272-273 Atmospheric properties, 730 (Appendix 2)
Aerospike engine or thrust chamber, Attitude control, see Reaction control
296--300; see also Nozzle Attitude control rockets or attitude control
Aging, see Solid propellant systems (ACS), see Auxiliary rockets
Air launched rocket, 150-152 Automatic engine controls, 392-393,
Altitude: 402--404; see also Liquid propellant
test facilities, 715 rocket engines
variation of atmospheric air properties, Auxiliary rockets or auxiliary propulsion,
730 (Appendix 2) 198, 200, 228-232; see also Reaction
variation of thrust, 33-34 control systems
Aluminum or aluminum powder, 189, 191, electric propulsion, 700
192, 245, 303, 305, 424, 482, 484, 486, liquid propellants, 231
496, 499, 558, 588, 614 pulsing, 229, 289, 301, 700--705
Ammonium nitrate (AN), 189, 483, 496, rotation maneuvers, 133, 135-137
506, 597, 599 solid propellant, 466--467
Note: Boldface page numbers identify either a definition or the most pertinent or fundamental
discussion of the listed item.
739
740 INDEX
Auxiliary rockets or auxiliary propulsion filament-wound reinforced plastic, 420,
(continued) 42 l, 423, 547-549
station keeping, 129, 134, 701 loads, 541
thrusters, 300--304 materials, 425, 542, 546
metal, 423, 544--547
stresses and elongation, 543
Baffles, injector, 357 Catalyst, 253, 260, 302, 383, 672, 703
Ballistic evaluation motors, 427 Cathode, 676, 685, 686
Ballistic missile, 25, 125 Cavitation, 365, 368, 375-376
Ballistics, see Internal ballistics Chamber (combustion), 200; see also Heat
Battery, electric power, 703 transfer; Thrust chamber
Bearings (of turbopump), 370 gas composition, 181, 183, 191
Bell-shaped nozzle, see Nozzle gas temperature, see Temperature,
Beryllium, 245, 500 combustion gas
Binder, see Solid propellant(s); Grain geometry/volume, 74, 282-28
Bipropellant, 188,201,209,224,230,231, pressure, see Nozzle pressure ratio
272,300,301,307,325,342 pressure control, 403
Blast tube, see Nozzle wall loads and stresses, 293-296
Blow-down pressurized feed system, 208, Characteristic chamber length, 272, 283
21 l Characteristic speed (electric propulsion),
Bonding of solid propellant grains, see 668, 669
Grain, solid propellant Characteristic velocity or characteristic
Boron, 499 exhaust velocity or c*, 34, 36, 64, 68,
Boundary layer, see Nozzle, boundary 188, 189, 190, 272, 325, 424, 594
layer c* efficiency, 64
Burning rate, solid propellant, 418-437, Chemical equilibrium, 46, 164, 173, 174
545; see also Grain; Hybrid rocket; Chemical reaction:
Solid propellant rocket motors in chamber or motor case, 169-172,
burning surface contour, 424,426, 443 343-346
catalyst or burning rate modifier, 426, energy balance, 169
435 free energy or chemical potential, 165
effect of acceleration, 436--437 mass balance, 170
erosive burning, 168, 433--435, 575 in nozzle, 172-179
exponent or pressure exponent, 424, 428, Chemical rocket propellant performance
480 analysis, 40, 41, 160-196
function of pressure, 427--430 Choked flow condition, 58
modifier, 495, 496, 501 Chugging combustion instability, 349
temperature sensitivity (coefficient), 424, Classification of:
430--433 electric thrusters, 661, 689
Burning time and action time, 424, 446, hazards, 423, 491--429
447 liquid propellant rocket engines, 198
definition for solid propellant motor, liquid propellant feed systems, 204
441, 446 rocket propulsion systems, 1-14, 198
Burning surface, 427, 438--439 solid propellants, 474--480
Buzzing combustion instability, 350 thrust vector controls, 608-610
turbines, 380--381
solid propellant rocket motors, 423
c* (cee star), see Characteristic velocity thrust vector controls, 609-6 IO
Carbon-carbon, 273, 284, 289, 303, 309, valves, 253
425,558,559, 614 Cold gas propellants and thrusters, 41,
Carbon phenolic, 425, 554, 559, 560, 561 201,231, 263--264, 300,303
Case or solid rocket motor case, 418, 420, Combustion, see also Temperature; Solid
421, 425, 540-549, 573, 614; see also propellant rocket motors; Thrust
Nozzle; Solid propellant rocket motor chambers
INDEX 741
analysis and simulation, 169-172, Copper, 296,304,305
346-347 Cost, 632
control of instabilities, 356-360 Cracks in grain, see Failure modes
efficiency,! 71, 342 Criteria for selection of optimum
gas composition ( of products), 181, 183, propulsion system, 630-634
184, 187, 191,192,488 Cryogenic propellants, 201, 213
hybrid propellant rockets, 588-592, 733 Cumulative damage of solid propellants,
instability, 281-282, 348-360, 437, 481, 464, 465
599-604 Curing agents for solid propellant, 496,
acoustic instability, 528-532 501
rating techniques, 355-356 Current density, 675
remedy and design, 356-360, Cut-off, see Thrust termination
533-535
liquid propellants, 250-251, 342-361,
Dalton's law, 162
406
Deep space flight, 124, 136
process, 161, 343-346, 520-524; see also
Deflagration, 447
Stay time
Delivered performance, 93
solid propellants, 520-539, 543-546
Delta space launch vehicle, 18
stability assessment or rating technique,
Density, see also Specific gravity
355-356
of atmosphere, 730
vibration, longitudinal, radial or
average, for bipropellants, 249
tangential, 352-353
Density specific impulse, 249, 441, see also
vibration frequency, 348, 352, 354, 355,
Specific impulse
531, 603
Design calculation examples for:
Communication signal attenuation,
hybrid propellant rocket, 593-599
251
liquid propellant thrust chamber,
Composite propellant, see Solid
324-335
propellant(s)
solid propellant motor, 572-575
Computers programs:
Detonation, see Solid propellant,
combustion analysis, 179-180, 346-34 7,
detonation
532-533
Discharge:
exhaust plume analysis, 657-658
coefficients for injectors, 277-279
flow analysis, 205, 554
correction factor for propulsion system,
grain strain analysis, 460---461
90-91
heat transfer, 308, 315
Double-base propellant, see Solid
ignition, 321
propellant
nozzle contour, 556
Drag:
performance analysis, 394
coefficient, I 05
rocket engine control, 405
force, 104-106, 128
testing, 722-724
Ducted rocket, 2
Conical nozzle, 77-78; see also Nozzle
Duct propulsion, I, 2, 4, 9
Continuum flow regime, 646
Duty cycle (pulsing), 139, 289
Controls for rocket engines, 206, 392-393,
396---405, 633
Controls for rocket testing, 713, 724
Conversion factors and constants, 727-729 Earth's rotation, 117, 119
(Appendix !) Effective exhaust velocity, see Exhaust
Cooling with liquid propellant, see also velocity
Radiation cooling; Regenerative Electric propulsion, 12-13, 40, 41, 660-710
cooling; Thrust chamber applications and missions, 661, 702
in cooling jackets, 287-288 arcjet, 12, 40, 41, 662, 673----677, 691, 698
heat transfer, 308-320 electromagnetic or
hydraulic losses in cooling jacket, magnetoplasmadynamic, 40, 41,
292-293 662, 663-334, 688-692, 698,699
742 INDEX
Electric propulsion (continued) Expander cycle, 224, 226
electrostatic or ion rocket, 12, 40, 41, Expansion-deflection nozzle, 76, 84
66 l, 662, 663-664, 679-688, 698, Explosive ingredients of solid propellants,
699 502; see also HMX; Nitrocellulose;
ionization schemes, 684 Nitroglycerine
electrothermal, 66 l, 670-677 Expulsion efficiency, 212
flight performance, 666-670, 696-700 Extendible nozzle 309, 43 l
hall effects thrusters, 40, 662, 692-696,
689,699
performance data, 40, 41, 662, 674, 694 Failure modes of solid rocket motors
power (magnitude), 40, 662, 664, 665, ( cracks and de bonding), 454
667, 674, 678, 692-683, 694, 698, Failure sensing, 723
699,700 Failures, postaccident procedures, 725
power conditioning/conversion, 660, Feed system, liquid propellants, l 97,
700, 705-706 203--205, 206; see also Tanks
power supply and power sources, 664, electric propulsion, 660, 672, 70 l
665, 667, 701-704 gas pressurized, 7, l 98, 205-211,
pulsed plasma, 12, 40, 41, 664, 700, 705- 218-221, 273, 327; see also Blow
700 down feed system; Pressure
resistojet, 40, 41, 662, 671-674, 698, 700 regulator
thruster efficiency, 662, 665-666, 673, with turbopump, 8, 198, 205-211,
694, 698, 700 221-227, 273, 327, 386
thruster types, 66 l, 662, 664, 698 Filaments used for cases, 549
typical propellants, 662 Filament winding machines, 515
Electrostatic discharge, 488, 489 Film coefficient (heat transfer):
Elliptical orbit, 121-124 gas, 310,312,313
Energy, 36-38, l 18, 120 liquid, 310, 313, 317
balance, 37 Film cooling with liquid propellants,
conservation, 47-48 290-291
conversion efficiency, 37-38 Finite element analysis of solid propellant
orbiting satellite, l l 8 grain, 308, 461
release efficiency, 172 Flame, see Combustion; Rocket exhaust
Engine, see Liquid propellant rocket plume
engine Flap in liner (also called boot), 462-463;
Engine cycles, 222-227 see also Grain, Solid propellant rocket
Enthalpy, chemical reaction, 46, 160, 166, motors
169, 190, 439 Flexible nozzle bearing, see Thrust vector
Entropy in nozzle expansion, 165, 167, control
168, 174, 190 Flexible pipe joint, 234, 235
Environment, 247, 265, 634; see also Flight, 102-159; see also Application;
Hazards; Rocket exhaust plumes Drag; Lift; Spacecraft; Vehicle
Equation summary, 731-732 (Appendix 3) velocity
Equilibrium constant, 168-169 ballistic missiles, 125
Equivalent diameter (hydraulic radius), forces acting on the vehicle, 106-108
317 influence of propulsion system, 115-117
Erosive burning, see Burning rate interplanetary, 122, 126
Escape from solar system, 124 maneuvers, 132-136
Escape velocity from earth, l 18 motions, 108-113
Exhaust gas, exhaust jet, flame, see performance, chemical propulsion,
Rocket exhaust plume 108-154
Exhaust nozzle, see Nozzle performance, electrical propulsion,
Exhaust velocity, see Nozzle, effective 666-670
exhaust velocity; Nozzle, exit or perturbations to space flight path,
exhaust velocity 125-129
INDEX 743
rotation maneuvers, 133, 135, 136, 137 Gas pressurized feed system, see Feed
in space, 105, 117-132 system
stability, 153-154 Gelled liquid propellants, 20 l, 261-263
testing, 711, 724-725 Geosynchronous earth orbit (GEO), see
vehicles, 139-149 Orbits
velocity and acceleration at burn-out, Gibbs free energy, see Free energy
104--108, 109, 112-113, 118, 122, Gimbal, 199, 272, 610---ol2, 615, 616
668-669 Grain, solid propellant, 444--453, 573; see
Flow diagram or flow sheet: also Solid propellant rocket motor
feed system, 209 aging, 464, 481, 489
manufacturing process, 513 binder, 424, 500
preliminary design, 571 bond strength, 454, 465
propulsion system selection, 626 burning surface to nozzle throat area
Flow (gas); see also Nozzle ratio (K), 438-439
isentropic, 48, 52-75 cartridge loaded, 423, 444, 464
fuel mass flow (hybrid), 527-528 case-bonded, 420, 423, 444, 462-464
mass (or weight) flow, 28, 29, 46, 48, 59, configurations, 445-452
203,272,292, 328-329, 392, design, 448
427-428, 595,684,694 end burning, 45 l
multiphase flow (gas with liquid drops hybrid, 585-593
and/or solid particles), 88-89 inhibitor, 447
supersonic, sonic and subsonic, 58 insulator, thermal, 444
Flow, liquid propellant, 328, 363, 392-393, liner, 444
397, 427, 428 multiple grain (restartable), 452-453
flow and pressure balance, 227-228 perforation, port, or internal cavity, 445,
Fluorine, 243, 244, 246, 582 448
Flywheels, 231 regressive, neutral or progressive
Force; see also Thrust burning, 423, 445
sliver, 445
acting on flight vehicle, 106-113
stress and strain, 453-466
measurement, 720
cumulative damage, 465
solar radiation pressure, 14
stress relief flap or boot, 420,
Free energy or chemical potential, 165,
462-463
166, 171
tensile strength, 457
Free molecular flow, 646
surface cracks, 454
Frozen equilibrium, 173, 174
thermal cycling, 459
Fuel:
volumetric loading, 447
cells, 702
Graphite, 558, 559
hybrid rocket, see Hybrid propellant
Gravitational attraction, 107
rockets
Gravity gradients, 128
liquid propellant, 255-259
pump, 365, 366, 368, 372
solid propellant, 499-500
Hazards:
classification, 423, 491-492
explosion, see Solid propellant,
Gas constant, 48, 52, 55, 57, 61,193,342 detonation
Gaseous propellant rocket engine, 7, 41, fire, 247
201, 261-263 health, 247-248, 264
Gas generator; see also Liquid propellant insensitive munitions, 492-493
rocket engine; Solid propellant rocket liquid propellants and engines, 247-248
motor solid propellant, 487-489, 491-494
engine cycle, 222-224 toxic gas exposure limits, 719-720
liquid propellant, 189,193 toxicity, 493
solid propellant, 422, 505-507 Heat of formation, 164, 165
744 INDEX
Heat of reaction, 164 Ideal rocket, 46-47
Heat transfer, 285-292, 330----33 l; see also Ignition/igniter:
Film coefficient; Liquid propellant analysis and design, 335, 567-568
thrust chamber, cooling delay or time lag, 321, 424
analysis, 308-320 hardware, 269, 420, 421
cooling techniques; 286---292, 33 l; see hybrid propellant motor, 580, 583
Insulation thermal; Radiation hypergolic (spontaneous), 250, 323, 580,
cooling; Regenerative cooling 583
film cooling, 290----29 l inadvertent ignition, 487
from exhaust plume, 640 liquid propellants, 250-251, 269,
heat absorbing capacity of coolant, 318 320-323
to liquid propellants, 250 propellants for igniter, l 2, 323, 508-509
steady state, 278-288 pyrotechnic, pyrogen, 322, 424,
transient, 286, 288-290 563-565-526
Helium, 218, 264
solid propellants, 418, 420, 42 l, 424,
HMX (Cyclotetramethylene
459,487, 524--526
tetranitramine), 476, 477, 478, 479,
Impulse, see Specific impulse; Total
482,483,484,485, 495-497, 502
impulse
Hohmann transfer orbit, 122, 666
Impulse to weight ratio, 30, 442
HTPB (Hydroxyl terminated
Inconel, 305
polybutadiene), 479,481, 482, 496,
Inducer (impeller), 377, 378
498, 500, 58 l, 582, 588, 590; see also
Ingredients of solid propellants, 49 5-497
Polybutadiene
Inhibitor, 447, 51 l
Hybrid propellant rockets, 7, 9, 579-607;
Injector, liquid propellants, 200, 269,
see also HTPB; Nozzle
271-282, 334--335; see also Thrust
advantages/disadvantages, 580
chamber
applications and propellants, 580----585
baffles, 357
boundary layer blowing coefficient,
effect on heat transfer, 28 l
737-738 (Appendix 5)
platelet, 270, 276
combustion instability, 599-604
pressure drop and flow, 273, 276---280
design example, 593-599
energy and flow balance, 733 structure, 28 l
fuel regression rate, 587, 589, 590, 592, types, 273, 274, 392
733-736 (Appendix 4) Insensitive munitions, 492-493
performance analysis and grain Instability of combustion, see Combustion
configuration, 585-593 Instrumentation, l 97, 720-724
performance data, 582, 583, 585, Insulation, thermal, internal, 29 l-292, 425,
594--598 447, 509-51 l, 558, 614, 673
Hydrazine, 188, 244, 245, 246, 257-258, Insulation, thermal, external, 425, 5 l l, 673
259-261, 272,317,318,386,671,677, Interfaces between propulsion system and
678, see also Monomethylhydrazine; vehicle, 4 l l, 634--637
Unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine Internal ballistics, 439
Hydrocarbon fuels: International rocket effort, 15, see also
liquid, 255; see also RP-I fuel LE-7; RD-120, RD-170, Vulcain
solid, see Solid propellant, binder; Interplanetary missions, 124, 126,132,664
Plasticizer data on planets, l l 9
Hydrogen, 181, 188, 191,193,243,244,
velocity requirements, l 3 l
246, 256---257, 264,309,318,320,671,
Ion propulsion or ion rocket, see Electric
683, 691
propulsion
Hydrogen peroxide, 243, 246, 247, 253
Isentropic flow through nozzles, 48, 52-75;
Hydroxyl ammonium nitrate, 261
see also Flow
Hydroxyl terminated polybutadeine, see
!US (Interim Upper Stage) rocket motor
(HTPB)
Hypergolic ignition, see Ignition (UTC), 421,614
INDEX 745
Jet, see Rocket exhaust plume chamber pressure, 200, 272, 386, 392
Jetavator, see Thrust vector control control, 206, 396--405
Jet fuel, 256 engine cycles, 222-227, 386
Jet power, 36 engine preliminary design, 389-396
Jet vane, see Thrust vector control engine design optimization, 391
engine systems, 384-386
engine support structure, 197, 235-236
Kerosene, 255,256,269, 317, 392; see also
gas generators and preburners, 189, 193,
RP-I fuel
223,227,342, 383-384, 392-393
Kinetic energy rate of jet, 36, 662
inert mass, 391
pressurized gas or pump feed, 198, 200,
Lapse rate, 719 203-227, 408
Launch vehicle, see Space launch vehicle shut down or termination, 40 I
LE-7 and LE-5A rocket engines (Japan), starting, ignition, and thrust build-up,
272-273, 363, 386 320-323, 397-402
Life of electric propulsion, 698 system integration and engine
Life in space, 200 optimization, 411-412
Life of solid grain, 481 system performance, 384-386
Lift, aerodynamic: thrust chamber or thrusters, 268-341
coefficient, I 07, I 08
variable thrust, 96
force, I 06, I 09
Lorentz force, 678, 689, 693
Liner, 425,447, 509-510
Low Earth orbit (LEO), 129
Liquid oxygen, see Oxygen
Lunar flight, 124
Liquid propellant, 200, 201-203, 241-267;
see also Fuel; Hydrazine; Hydrogen;
Mach number, 49, 50
Kerosene; Methane; Nitric Acid;
Magnetic field flight perturbation, 128
Nitrogen tetroxide, Oxidizer; Oxygen;
Maintainability, 633
RP-I
Mandrel for solid propellant grain, 514
budget, 387-389
Maraging steel, 546
combustion, 342-361; see also
Masses of vehicle, definitions, 103
Combustion
Mass flow, 39, 59, 427-428, 595; see also
cryogenic, 181, 182-188, 201
Flow (gas); Flow, liquid propellant
gelled, 201, 261-263
Mass fraction, see Propellant mass fraction
hazards, 247-248, 264-265
Mass ratio, 29, 104, 105, 112, 116, 699
heat transfer, 285-292, 250, 308-320
Materials and materials properties,
ignition/start, 250-251
304-308, 425,542,558, 672-673
mixture ratio, 182, 184, 185, 188, 193,
202,210,272,278,329,363,386, metals, 425; see also Niobium; Rhenium;
392-393, 397,404 Stainless steel; Titanium
monopropellant, 40, 201, 259-261, reinforced plastics, 425; see also Carbon
302-303 carbon
performance of several combinations, Measurement/sensing of data, 720-724
181, 182, 188 Methane, 188, 243, 244, 246, 255-256, 264,
properties, 242-251 671
storable propellant, 201 Micrometeorology, 719
Liquid propellant rocket engines, 6, 7, 8, Migration in solid propellant grain, 511
197-240, 272-273, 386; see also Minimum smoke propellants, 507
Auxiliary rockets; Controls; Engine Minuteman rocket motor, 620
cycles; Feed systems; Heat transfer; Missiles, military, 23, 25, 136, 149-152,
Tanks, Thrust chambers; and 419,421,422
Turbopumps Missions, 198, 632, 700-70 I; see also
advantages/disadvantages, 628-629 Applications; Requirements
boost propulsion, 198, 200 Mission velocity, 130-132
calibration, 227-228, 405-411 Mixing of solid propellant, 512, 513, 515
746 INDEX
Mixture ratio, see Liquid propellant rocket exit cone, 551, 558, 309
engine; Hybrid propellant rocket exit or exhaust velocity, , 32, 33, 36, 52-
Molecular mass (or weight), 50, 53, 163, 54, 55, 202
188, 189, 190, 192, 244, 245, 256, 260, exit gas composition, 175, 181, 184, 187
485 expansion-deflection nozzle, 76, 84,
Monomethyl hydrazine, 188, 244, 258-259, extendible or movable, 284, 309, 420,
270, 272 421,550,551,612,614; see also
Monopropellant, 41, 231, 259-261; see also Thrust vector control
Thrust chamber, monopropellant flow with frozen or shifting equilibrium,
Motor, see Rocket motor 173, 174
Movable nozzle, see Nozzle, extendible or gas expansion process, 161
movable heat absorption, 556---563
Multistage or multistep rocket vehicles, 16, illustrations of nozzles, 9, 199, 418, 420,
139-144 444, 545, 551, 553, 554, 555, 612,
Multiple propulsion systems, 384--385 613, 614
insert, 9, 425, 553
losses, 85-86, 555
Net positive suction head, 376 materials, 556---563, 558; see also
Niobium, 200, 270, 305, 306, 307, 331 Ablative materials
Nitric acid, or inhibited red fuming nitric multiphase flow, 88-89
acid (IRFNA), 243, 245, 246, 254 multiple nozzles, 84-85
Nitrocellulose, 495, 498, 502 optimum expansion, 33, 70, 188, 189
Nitrogen tetroxide, 243, 245, 246, 254, 270, over-expanded, 68-74
272,317,392 performance correction, 90-92
Nitroglycerine, 483, 495, 498, 502-503 performance parameters/specified
Noise of exhaust plume, 641, 653-654 conditions, 92-94, 272, 392, 418,
Nozzle; see also Flow; Mass flow; Liquid 420, 421, 424, 443, 444, 553, 614
propellant rocket engine; Solid effect of altitude, 34, 72, 73
propellant rocket motor; Specific plug nozzle, see Nozzle, aerospike
impulse pressure drop or pressure ratio, 33, 51,
aerospike, 76, 83-84, 296-300 53, 56, 57-64, 65-67, 181, 185, 186,
alignment, 94--96 187, 190, 191, 192
analysis, thermochemical, 172-179 scarfed, 9 5-96
area ratio, 50, 51, 59, 60, 61, 65-67, 73, separation of flow, 69-73
86, 190, 192, 272, 326---327, 386, shape, length and configuration, 75-85,
392, 425, 284, 326---327
bell shaped or contoured, 77--82, 199, solid propellant rocket motors, 418, 425,
326, 329, 554, 555, 584, 585, 612, 439, 550--563, 574
614 submerged, 550, 551
blast tube, 421, 422, 551 supersonic, sonic, and subsonic flow, 58
boundary layer, 46, 86--87, 176, 736, theory, 45-94
737-738; see also Hybrid propellant throat condition or diameter, 55-58, 60
rockets under-expanded, 68-74
change in gas composition, 187, 191, 192 Nuclear power generation, 704-705
cone angle correction factor, 77-78 Nuclear rocket propulsion, 10-11, 40
conical, 77-82 Nucleate boiling heat transfer, 317
contraction ratio, 85
critical pressure, temperature or velocity,
57, 58 Ohm's law, 675
divergence or diverging exit section, Optimum expansion, see Nozzle, optimum
77-78, 85,557 expansion
effective exhaust velocity, 29, 31, 34, 36, Orbits of satellites and spacecraft:
52, 53, 54, 59, 440 circular, 120
erosion, 555,575 deorbit, 135, 136
INDEX 747
elliptical, 121-122 Pogo pulsations or feed system instability,
energy, 118-120 350, 351
geosynchronous (GEO), 129, 663, 701 Polybutedaine (various), 479, 480, 482,
injection into orbit, orbit transfer, 483, 496, 498, 581; see also HTPB
122-124, 133, 136; see also Polyether, polyester, polyurethane, 496,
Hohmann transfer orbit 498
low earth orbit (LEO), 129, 663, 666, Port area or cavity, see Grain
701 Positive expulsion devices, 214-218,
maintenance, station keeping, 129, 134, Power conditioning/conversion, see
701 Electric propulsion
payloads for different orbits, 147-149 Power interfaces, 635
period of revolution, 118, 120 Preburner, see Liquid propellant rocket
perturbations, 125-129 engines, gas generators and
raising orbit altitude, 122, 136, 701 pre burners
synchronous orbit see Orbit, Pressure, atmosphere, 730
geosynchronous Pressure balance, 227-228, 408--411
Oxidizer(s): Pressure exponent, see Burning rate
liquid, 251-255 Pressure oscillations, see Combustion
pump, 364, 366, 368, 372 instability
solid, 494-499, 502-503 Pressure regulators, 7, 210, 230, 233,
Oxygen, 191, 192, 243, 245, 246, 252-253, Pressurized feed system, 7, 205--211,
26~ 27~ 30~ 325, 38~ 39~ 581,582, 218-221; see also Feed system
671 Producibility, 633
performance data with RP-I, 182-188 Propellant, see Liquid propellant; Solid
performance data with hydrogen, 181, propellant; Igniter propellant; or
188 Gaseous propellant
Propellant budget, 387-389
Propellant mass fraction, 30, 105, 425, 442,
Particles or particulates: 668
size parameters, 503-505 Propellant tanks, see Tanks
suspended in exhaust gas, 648 Propellant utilization, 206, 404
vibration damping, 358 Propulsive efficiency, 38
Pegasus space launch vehicle, 18, 148, 303, Pulse modulation of pulsing thruster, 324
420 Pulsing thruster operation, see Duty cycle;
Perfect gas law, 48 Electric propulsion, pulsed plasma
Performance; see also Nozzle, effective Pump, 363, 366, 371-380; see also
exhaust velocity; Nozzle, exit or Tur bop ump
exhaust velocity; Propellant mass cavitation, 368, 375--376
fraction; Specific impulse desirable propellant properties, 250
actual, standard, delivered, and efficiency, 363, 365, 372, 374, 393
guaranteed, 92-94 head and suction head, 372, 375-377
considerations for propulsion systems, inducer, 377-378
632 shrouded impeller, 373
correction factors, 90-92 specific speed, 373-374
theoretical values, 93, 160-196 type or configuration, 364, 365, 366, 374
Perigee, 121 Pyrolytic graphite, 353, 358
Perturbation of flight path, 125-129
Pipes or flow conduits, 232-235
Qualification of rocket propulsion system:
Piston expulsion, 217
preliminary flight rating test, 712
Pitch maneuver, 137
qualification test, 712
Planets, data, 119
Plastcizer, 495--497, 501-502
Plug nozzle, see Nozzle, aerospike Radiation heat transfer and cooling, 270,
Plume, see Rocket exhaust plume 286,288,290,306,307, 319-320, 558
748 INDEX
Ramjet, 2-5, 10 RP-I fuel (kerosene), 188, 243, 245, 246,
RD-4-15 Thruster and small RCS (Kaiser 255-256, 272, 325, 331
Marquardt), 272-273, 307 RS-27 rocket engine (Boeing/Rocketdyne),
RD-120, RDl70, RD 253 (Russia), 226, 34, 272-273, 366
392-395, 402 RS-68 rocket engine (Boeing/Rocketdyne),
Reaction control system (RCS), 136--139, 223, 224, 225, 386
228-232, 300-304; see also Auxiliary
rocket engine
Reduced smoke propellant, 507 Safe and arm device, 565, 566
Rendezvous (in space), 123, 134, 136 Safety; see also Hazards
Reentry and landing, 134 hybrid propellants, 580
Regenerative cooling, 273, 286, 288, 290, liquid propellants, 206, 264-266, 397,
309, 315-319; see also Thrust chamber 716-717
Reliability, 206, 632, 700 rating of solid propellant, 477
Requirements and constraints for solid solid propellants, 490-494, 565, 566; see
propellant rocket motors, 569 also Insensitive munitions
Requirements for mission, 198, 324, 447, survivability, 632, 637
632 testing, 711-726
Residual propellant: Satellite:
liquid, 212 orbits and payloads, 120
solid (slivers), 445, 453 period of revolution, 118, 120
Resistojet, 40, 41, 662, 671-674, 698; see perturbing forces, 125-129
also Electric propulsion velocity, 120
Reusability, 198, 206 SCAT (Secondary combustion augmented
Rhenium, 292, 305, 672 thruster; TRW, Inc.), 232
RL 10-3A rocket engine (Pratt & Selection of rocket propulsion systems,
Whitney, Div. of UTC), 224, 386 325, 624-637; see also Interfaces
RL IOB-2 rocket engine (Pratt & Whitney, criteria. 630---634
Div. of UTC), 272-273, 386 selection process, 625-630
Rocket engine, see Liquid propellant Separation of nozzle flow, 69-72
rocket engine Shifting equilibrium, 173, 174
Rocket exhaust plume, 151, 639-659, see Silica phenolic, 559
also Nozzle; Shock waves Shock wave, 46, 297, 299, 641, 642,
aerodynamic effect, 152-153, 649-650 651Hi52
color, luminosity, and spectral Single stage to orbit, 17, 297
distribution, 251, 651Hi51 Sliver, residual solid propellant, 424, 445,
plume appearance and shape, 641-652 449, 453, 469
radio signal attenuation, 251, 641, 655- Sloshing of liquid in tank, 214
656, 701 Smoke of plume, see Rocket exhaust
smoke, 251, 476, 652-653 plume
Rocket motor, see Solid propellant rocket Solar cells, 703-704
motor Solar heating propulsion or solar thermal
Rocket-assisted gun-launched projectiles, propulsion, 14, 40, 41
152, 153 Solar propulsion (by radiation pressure) or
Rocket propulsion: solar sail, 14
applications, 15-25, 198-200, 422, 580- Solid propellant(s), 6, 9, 417, 425, 448,
581, 663-665, 700-701 474-519, 545; see also Burning rate;
definition, I Combustion; Cumulative damage;
exhaust gas or flame, see Rocket exhaust Grain; Ignition
plume abbreviations and acronyms for
systems for certain flight maneuvers, 136 ingredients, 495, 496-497
testing, 771-726 aging, 464, 481, 489
types of, 4-15 aluminum, 475-478
Roll or roll maneuver, 137, 609 binder, 482, 495, 496, 500, 501
INDEX 749
characteristics and behavior, 480-487 design approach, 569-575
chemical ingredients (chamber), extinction or thrust termination, 420,
480-487, 488 526-528
chemical gas reaction products, 19 l, insulators, liners, and inhibitors, 425,
192, 488 447, 509-511
comparison of different types, 477, 478, loads and failure mode, 545, 459
482-483 materials, 425, 542, 558
composite, 423, 424, 428, 429, 475, 482, nozzles, 9, 418, 420, 421, 444
484,485,486, 496-497 requirements and constraints, 569, 57 l
composite modified double base, 423, tactical missile motors, 421, 422
429,476,482,484,487,495,498, temperature limits, 422
545
two-pulse motor (restartable), 452-453
detonation, 477, 490-491; see
weights/masses (typical). 420, 424, 454,
Deflagration
545
double base, 423, 475, 482, 484, 486,
Spacecraft, 17, 21, 145; see also Orbits;
495, 498
Flight; Satellite
gas generator, 422, 505-507
attitude control, see Reaction control
hazards, 487-489, 491-492
system
high energy propellant, 476'
maneuvers, 132-133
ingredients or raw materials, 482, 484,
mission velocity, 130-132
494--505; see also Aluminum;
perturbing forces, 125-129
Ammonium nitrate; Ammonium
surface contamination, 654--655
perchlorate; HMX; HTPB;
Space flight, see Flight; Orbits
Nitrocellulose; Nitroglycerine;
Space launch vehicles, 15-25, 144--149
Polybutadiene
boosters, 15, 136, 422
material characterization, 454-458
upper stages, 136, 422
migration, 51 l
Space Shuttle, 19, 22
particle size parameters, 503-505
flight velocity breakdown, 130
performance data, 424, 477, 478, 479,
main engine, 22, 199, 226, 227, 363, 386,
485,486
400-402
plasticizer, 495-497, 501-502
reaction control and orbit maneuver
processing or manufacturing, 4 79, 48 l,
system, 22, 207-2 l 0
511-515
cast or extruded, 478 solid rocket motor/nozzle, 545,
representative formulations, 487 553-556
safety, 477, 493-494 Specifications:
smoky, smokeless, or low smoke, 476, rocket propulsion system, 626,631
507-508 propellants, 25 I
stress relaxation modulus, 460---462, 479 Specific gravity/density, 188, 189, 243, 249,
testing, 7 I I -726 424,479,485,583
thermal cycling, 459, 464 Specific heat ratio, 48, 68, 188, 189
upper pressure limit, 493 Specific impulse, 3, 28, 36, 39, 40, 53, 175,
Solid propellant rocket motors, 6, 9, 180, 181, 185, 186, 188, 189, 190. 272,
417--473; see also Burning rate; Case; 300, 325, 327, 386, 392, 424, 440, 443,
Grain; Ignition; Insulation; Liner; 479, 480, 485, 545, 662, 678, 694, 698,
Nozzle; Solid propellants 699, 700
action time and burn time, 424, 440, 441 density specific impulse, 249
advantages and disadvantages, 628-629 theoretical, actual, reference, and
basic performance relations and data, guaranteed values, 92-94, 440
424, 437--444 Specific power, 40
booster, 20, 22, 420, 422 Specific speed (pump), 373-374
chamber pressure, 428-430, 439 Stability:
combustion, 439, 528-536 combustion, 348-360
components, 9,417,418 flight, 153-154
750 INDEX
Stability (continued) variation effects, 250
liquid propellant (chemical stability), wall ( of chamber), 295, 310, 311
249-250, 348-360 Tensile tests on propellant specimen,
Staged combustion cycle, 224, 227 455---458
Staging configurations of vehicles, 130, Testing of rocket propulsion systems,
133, 139-147 711-726
Stagnation pressure and temperature, 49, facilities and safeguards, 713-720
50, 51 flight testing, 711, 724---725
Stainless steel, 273, 304, 305, 332 instrumentation and data management,
Standard atmosphere, 730 720-724
Starting, 320-323, 400---402, 398; see also postaccident procedures, 725-726
Controls for rocket engines; Feed types of tests, 711-713
systems; Ignition; Thrust chamber Thermochemical data for carbonmonoxide,
Static rocket system tests, see Testing 167
Station keeping, see Auxiliary rocket Thermodynamic properties of chemical
systems; Orbits constituents, 165
Stay time or residence time, 284, 346 Thermodynamic relations and nozzle flow,
Stoichiometric mixture, 163 47-92
Stop operations, see Thrust termination Throttling, see Variable thrust
Storable liquid propellants, 201 Thrust, 3, 28, 29, 32-34, 62--<i4, 68, 111,
Strand burner, 427 225, 272, 273, 286, 328, 386, 392, 418,
Strap-on motor/engine, 136 420, 424, 545, 614, 662, 678, 681-682,
Stresses and strains, 293-296, 458---466, 694, 698, 702, 720
542-543; see also Case; Grain; Liquid acting on vehicle, 109, 110
propellant rocket engine; Solid aerospike, 297
propellant rocket motor; Tanks altitude variation, 34
Structure, 197; see also Interfaces, Liquid coefficient, 63--<iS, 181, 190, 327
propellant engine support structure, correction factor, 191
Summary of key equations, 731-732 equation, 32, 63
Sun, data, 119 termination, see Solid propellant rocket
Supersonic, sonic, and subsonic nozzles, 58 motors, extinction
Surface contamination by exhaust plume, thrust level control, 210, 392
654--655 theoretical, actual, reference, and
Surface tension screens, 217 guaranteed values, 92-94
Sweat cooling, 291 variable thrust, 96, 392-393
Synchronous satellite, 121, 129 Thrust chamber (small ones are called
thrusters), 6, 197, 198, 199, 200, 268--
341, 342, 660; see also Combustion;
Tactical missile rocket motor, 25, 422 Electric propulsion; Heat transfer;
Tank(s), 197, 207, 211-218, 330 Injection
positive expulsion during zero g, contraction area ratio, 273
214--218 cooling, 200, 268--273, 306, 326--327,
pressurization, 218-221 331-334,; see also Film cooling;
Tank head start, 384, 398, 400 Regenerative cooling
T-burner, 534 design, 324--327
Temperature, 48---49 ideal, 46---47
combustion (chamber temperature), 40, ignition and start up, 320-323
52, 53, 57, 181, 182, 186, 188, 189, life, 304
193,310,392, 424---425, 439,479 low thrust (called thrusters), 228-232,
limits for solid propellant grain storage, 300-304; see also Auxiliary rockets;
424, 443 Electric propulsion
sensitivity of solid propellant materials and fabrication, 304--308
(coefficient), 431---432 monopropellant, 40, 272-273, 302-303,
stagnation, 49 662
INDEX 751
pulsed or intermittent operation, 139, Vehicle, see Missile; Satellite; Spacecraft;
229, 289; see also Duty cycle Space launch vehicle,
sample design analysis, 324-335 acceleration, 113
tubes or milled channels, 199, 269, 270, base geometry and recirculation,
273,287,306, 332-334 649-650
volume and shape, 282-284, 329 flight performance, I 02-156, 324
wall loads and stresses, 293-296 forces, I 06---108
Thrust vector control (TVC), 608-623 integration with thrust vector control,
alignment accuracy, 617 621-622
flexible bearing, 420, 421, 425, 554, 611, masses, definition, I 03
613, 614 multistage, 16, 139-144
gimbal or hinge, 199, 272, 610-614, 615, power, 37
616 velocity of flight, 37, 104, 109, 112, 118,
injection of secondary fluid, 610, 611, 122, 130, 668-669
612, 617-619 Velocity (exhaust gas), see also Nozzle, exit
integration with vehicle, 621-622 and exhaust velocity; Characteristic
jet tabs, 612,617,618 velocity; Specific impulse.
jet vanes, 610, 611, 612 correction factor, 90, 441
with multiple thrust chambers or electric propulsion, 668, 681
nozzles, 620-621 effective exhaust velocity, 29, 34, 52, 53,
Thrust to weight ratio, 3, 40, 442 54, 59,327,440
Time to target, 150--152 at nozzle exit, 52-54
Titan space launch vehicle and payloads, ratio, 60, 61
15, 16, 18, 146 of sound or acoustic velocity, 49, 58
Titanium, 305, 307, 425, 614 throat velocity, 57-58
Total impulse, 27, 30, 424, 443, 694 Venturi, 235
Toxicity, 247, 265, 481, 493, 664, 713, 715; Vertical flight at 80 degrees (sounding
see also Hazards, health rocket), 113-115
monitoring and control, 717-718 Vibration energy absorption, 489
toxic clouds, 715-719 Vibration frequency (of chamber gas), see
toxic gas exposure limits, 719-720 Combustion
Turbine(s), 363, 366, 368, 380-383, 393; Vibrations of turbopumps, 370
see also Turbopump Volume impulse, 442
Turbojet, 4 Volumetric loading fraction, 447, 450
Turbopump, 7, 199, 200, 362-384, Vortexing of liquid propellants, 214
392-393; see also Pumps; Turbines Vulcain rocket engine (France), 223, 386
advanced turbopumps, 364-366
booster pump, 368, 369
design configurations, 364, 365, 366, 368 Warm gas propellant, 7, 231, 300
feed system, 198, 221-227, 393 Water hammer, 234-235
Two-phase flow, 88-89, 441 Web thickness and web fraction, 424, 447,
450
Ullage, definition, 211
Unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine
Xenon, 662,680,682,687,694,700
(UDMH), 243, 245, 258, 317, 392
Valves, 232-235, 672 Yaw maneuver, 137
Variable thrust, 96, 152, 323-324 YF-73, YF-75 rocket engines (China), 386
•