SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
CHANDRAYAAN-2 MISSION
ORBITER PAYLOADS
Terrain Mapping Camera-2 (TMC-2)
Terrain Mapping Camera-2 (TMC-2) is in continuation of the TMC of Chandrayaan-1
mission for topographic coverage of the moon. TMC-2 will measure the solar
radiation reflected / scattered from the Moon’s surface.
The primary objectives of TMC-2 are:
 To map the lunar surface with high spatial and vertical resolution in
continuation to TMC-1;
 To address the evolution of the Lunar surface through systematic
morphometric (height/depth, length, breadth etc.) mapping of various
landforms (Domes, Cones, rilles etc) and chronological studies.
Parameter Value
Spectral band 0.5-0.8 μm; pushbroom mode
Spatial resolution 5 m
Swath 20 km @ 100 km altitude
View angles (fore and aft) ±25º
Expected higher level data 10 m DEM
product
View of TMC-2
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
Chandrayaan-2 Large Area Soft X ray spectrometer (CLASS)
CLASS aims to measure the X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) spectra for deriving the
elemental abundance on the lunar surface. This is an indigenous version of
Chandrayaan-1 X-ray Spectrometer (C1XS) payload with a larger collection area.
The primary objectives of CLASS are:
 To map the abundance of major elements (Mg, Al, Si, Ca, Ti, Fe, Na) at tens
of km scales on the lunar surface.
 To search for Particle Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) during the passage of
Orbiter through the geotail, once a month around full moon.
The payload consists of sixteen Swept Charge Devices (SCDs) of a total area 64
cm2 arranged in four quadrants. Gold coated copper collimators define the field of
view (FOV).
CLASS flight model 16 detectors with collimators arranged in four
quadrants
Parameter Value
Spatial resolution 12.5 x 12.5 km @ 100 km altitude
Spectral resolution 165 eV @ 5.9 keV
Energy range 0.8 -20 keV
Expected higher level data product Maps of Mg, Al,Si, Ca and Fe (and any
element with > 1 wt% abundance)
Solar X-ray Monitor (XSM)
Solar X-ray Monitor (XSM) is a companion payload to CLASS to measure the
intensity of solar radiation in X-rays.
The primary objectives of this payload is
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
 To provide Solar X-ray spectrum in the energy range of 1-15 keV.
The solar flares are classified into five different classes known as A, B, C, M and X
class according to the GOES peak flux, with A being the faintest and X being the
highest intensity flare.
View of XSM
XSM is designed to measure Solar X-ray spectrum in the energy range of 1-15 keV.
This is achieved using the X-ray Silicon Drift Detector (SDD), which provide high
energy resolution as well as high count rate capability. XSM will provide high energy
resolution (better than 250 eV @ 5.9 keV) and high cadence (full spectrum every
second) measurements of solar X-ray spectra as input for analysis of data from
CLASS.
Parameter Value
FOV 45 x 45 deg
Spectral resolution < 250 eV @ 5.9 keV
Energy range 1 -15 keV
Expected higher level data product Solar spectrum with response matrices
Imaging IR Spectrometer (IIRS)
Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), an international AO payload on Chandrayaan-1
mission with the wavelength range 0.7-3 micron discovered the presence of Hydroxyl
and water-ice molecules on the high latitude lunar regions. IIRS aims to confirm OH,
H O and water-ice signatures by extending the wavelength range to 5 micron.
2
The primary objectives are:
 Global mineralogical and volatile mapping of the Moon in the spectral range of
~0.8-5.0 µm for the first time at high resolution of ~20 nm.
 Complete characterization of water/hydroxyl feature near 3.0 µm for the first
time at high spatial and spectral resolution
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
IIRS will measure the solar radiation reflected from the lunar surface in 256
contiguous spectral bands from 100 km lunar orbit.
View of IIRS payload
Parameter Value
Spatial resolution 80 m
No:of spectral bands 256
Spectral resolution 20 nm
Spectral band 0.8-5 μm
Expected higher level data product Calibrated and radiometrically corrected
reflectance spectra
Dual Frequency Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
The Dual-frequency (L and S) SAR is aimed at providing enhanced capabilities
compared to the Chandrayaan-1 S-band MiniSAR such as
a) L-band for greater depth of penetration (~5-10m i.e twice that of S-band)
b) Circular and full polarimetry with range of resolution options (2m – 75m) and
incident angles (9° - 35°) for understanding scattering properties of
permanently shadowed regions.
c) L and S band operation in stand-alone and simultaneous mode to validate
Mini-SAR observations.
The scientific objectives of this payload are:
i) High resolution lunar mapping in the polar regions.
ii) Quantitative estimation of water-ice in the polar regions
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
iii) Estimation of Regolith Thickness and its distribution
Dual Frequency SAR Dual Frequency SAR
In the Circular polarization mode, transmit signal is circularly polarized and reception
is by dual-linearly polarized channels. After reception, appropriate signal processing
will be done to extract polarimetric information by decomposition of image data. In
the full (linear) polarization mode, transmit polarization is switched between V & H for
consecutive pulses and reception is by simultaneous dual-linearly polarized
channels, for each of the transmit polarization.
Parameter Value
Band L and S
Spatial resolution 2- 75 m
Primary observations Polar and specific areas of interest
Expected higher level data product Calibrated SAR images …
Chandrayaan-2 Atmospheric Compositional Explorer-2 (CHACE-2)
Chandra’s Altitudinal Composition Explorer (CHACE) experiment aboard the Moon
Impact Probe (MIP) in Chandrayaan-1, in the mass range of 1 to 100 amu yielded
interesting scientific results on lunar Ar, Ne, He and H2, as well as a few heavier
species (mass>50 amu).
The CHACE-2 experiment is a sequel to the CHACE experiment. The primary
objective of CHACE-2 is:
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
 In-situ study of the composition and distribution of the lunar neutral exosphere
and its variability.
View of CHACE-2
It is a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMA) capable of scanning the lunar neutral
exosphere in the mass range of 1 to 300 amu with the mass resolution of ~0.5 amu.
The instrument is equipped with an electron impact ionizer that ionizes the ambient
neutrals, Bayard Alpert Gauge to measure the total pressure and a combination of
Faraday cup and Channel Electron Multiplier (CEM) detectors.
Parameter Value
Mass range 1-300 amu
Resolution 0.5 amu
Orbiter High Resolution Camera (OHRC)
This payload is included in Orbiter for imaging the landing site prior to lander
separation to ensure safe landing. The images taken in two different look angles will
be used for generating DEM of the landing site. Subsequent to lander separation,
this payload will be used as science payload.
The primary objective of this payload is to provide high-resolution images of lunar
regions of interest.
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
OHRC is a panchromatic high resolution camera with a ground sampling of 0.32 m.
OHRC images of 12 km x 3 km area, obtained in 2 orbits, will be used for safe
landing area selection. In addition to detection of craters and boulders, Digital
Elevation Model (DEM) generation is also planned. The binary image consisting of
edges of craters and other features with topology of entire area will be uploaded to
Lander-Craft as reference datasets in appropriate formats.
Parameter Value
Spatial resolution 0.32 m
Spectral band Panchromatic
Swath 12 km x 3 km
Expected higher level data DEM for selected regions
product
Dual Frequency Radio Science (DFRS) experiment
The Radio Science experiment relies on the principle that the phase of a radio
signal, propagating from a satellite to the ground station, gets perturbed when it
crosses through the planetary/ Lunar atmosphere or ionosphere.
The primary objectives of this payload are:
i) To study the variations in the ionosphere/ atmosphere at Moon
ii) To explore if the Ionosphere at Moon is omnipresent or has episodic
appearances (electron density ~ 100-1000 cm-3)
iii) To study the temporal variations, if any, in the ionospheric plasma density
(TEC ~ 1014 electrons / m2) with lander experiment
Coherent radio signals at X and S band radio frequencies and highly stable radio
source with the frequency stability of the order of 10-11 is provided for this payload.
LANDER PAYLOADS
Instrument for Lunar Seismic Activity (ILSA)
Seismology is the best geophysical tool to determine the internal structure of any
planetary body. A total of 12,000 moon quakes have been recorded by lunar
seismometers deployed during the Apollo missions. After the Apollo missions, there
have been no missions to Moon for conducting further studies in this field.
The Moon's seismic signals are however characterized by very low frequency and
moon quakes are of very low amplitude. In order to conduct seismic studies, a very
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
sensitive instrument (sub-micro gravity level) which can pick up ground displacement
or velocity or acceleration is developed.
 The primary objective of this payload is to characterise the seismicity around
the landing site.
ILSA will be kept ON during the entire mission life, of 1 lunar day, and it can sense
artificial seismic activities such as the Rover movement from the ramp, drilling of
thermal probe etc.
ILSA is a three axis MEMS-based seismometer that can measure ground
acceleration due to lunar quakes. The instrument is designed to resolve acceleration
as low as 100 ng /µHz with a dynamic range of± 0.5 g and a bandwidth of 40 Hz. To
meet the dynamic range, two sensors are used: Coarse range sensor (± 160 µg to ±
0.5 g) and fine range sensor (± 0.7 µg to ± 400 µg). The output data will be in the
form of ground acceleration which can be further processed to represent in terms of
velocity or displacement.
Chandra’s Surface Thermo-physical Experiment (ChASTE)
Knowledge of thermal properties and temperature distribution in lunar surface is
important for its geophysical characterisation. Lunar thermal models indicate a two
layer approach: The top 2-3 cm is a fluffy layer with low density and low thermal
conductivity. It is followed by a layer that is more compact and of higher thermal
conductivity. Due to this, a sharp change in temperature is expected in the top few
cm of the lunar surface.
The primary objective of ChASTE is:
 To measure the vertical temperature gradient and the thermal conductivity of
the lunar surface.
The instrument consists of a thermal probe (consisting of a series of temperature
sensors spaced at different distances and a heater) which is inserted into the lunar
regolith down to a depth of ~10 cm.
The payload operation has two modes: (i) Passive mode operation in which
continuous in situ measurements of temperature at different depths will be carried
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
out, (ii) Active mode operation in which the heater is switched ON for a specific time
duration. The variation of temperature due to heater ON is monitored as a function
of time and the thermal conductivity of the regolith under contact is estimated.
Langmuir Probe (LP)
The lunar ionosphere is a highly dynamic plasma environment. Tenuous and thin as
it may be, the lunar atmosphere contains valuable information on the near surface
volatiles and serves as a reservoir of gases released from the interior.
The Langmuir Probe has proved to be a important tool for plasma diagnostics and is
of great value in probing plasma in the space.
The primary objectives of this payload are:
1) To measure the ambient electron density/temperature near the lunar surface
2) To measure the temporal evolution of the Lunar plasma density for the first
time near the surface under varying solar conditions
The Chandrayaan-2 LP consists of a metal (conducting) sphere, which is inserted
into plasma and electrically biased with respect to a reference electrode to collect
electron and/or positive ion currents. The spherical probe of 5 cm diameter is made
of Ti alloy material coated with Titanium Nitride. The metallic sphere is mounted on a
CFRP boom of 1m length so that the probe is well immersed in the lunar plasma.
The observation method consists of obtaining Current-Voltage characteristic of the
probe as the applied bias voltage is swept from a negative to a positive potential (-14
to +14 V).
ROVER PAYLOADS
Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer (APXS)
Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer (APXS) is a well proven instrument for in situ
quantitative elemental analysis of planetary surfaces.
The primary scientific objective of APXS is
 To determine the elemental composition of the lunar surface in the regions
surrounding the landing site.
The technique is of X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy using in-situ excitation of
surface by an X-ray or alpha particle source. For this purpose, APXS uses 244Cm
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
radio-active sources emitting both alpha particles having energy of 5.8 MeV energy
and X-rays having energy of 14.3 and 18.3 keV, which excites the elemental
characteristic X-rays by the processes of particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) and
X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF).
The characteristic X-rays are detected by the ‘state-of-the-art’ X-ray detector known
as Silicon Drift Detector (SDD), which provides high energy resolution as well as
high efficiency in the energy range of 1 to 25 keV. This enables APXS to detect all
major rock forming elements like Na, Mg, Al, Si, Ca, Ti, Fe etc. (except O) and some
trace elements such as Sr, Y, Zr which are found in the lunar surface.
Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscope (LIBS)
Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) is a technique by which the
planetary surface is bombarded by a laser source which generates a plasma of the
elements at the surface whose characteristic lines of emission are studied by
spectroscopy.
The primary objective of this payload is
 To identify and determine the abundance of elements near the landing site.
LIBS instrument will be housed on Chandrayaan-2 Rover facing the lunar surface.
The collection lens to surface distance is 205 mm. LIBS instrument conducts the
investigation site on lunar surface by firing a series of high peak power laser pulses
which generates the so called laser induced plasma. The plasma during its decay
will emit the radiation which is collected by the LIBS instrument as a spectrum and
analyzed further for elemental presence and abundance.
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ
SPACE SCIENCE PROGRAMME OFFICE, ISRO HQ
Passive Experiment
Laser Retroreflector Array (LRA)
LRA will help us understand the dynamics of Earth’s moon system and also derive
clues about the lunar interior.
04 Aug 2019, ISRO HQ