IGNITION!
U.S. Navy photo
This is what a test firing should look like. Note the mach diamonds in the ex
haust stream.
U.S. Navy photo
And this is what it may look like if something goes wrong. The same test cell,
or its remains, is shown.
I G N I T I O N!
An Informal History of
Liquid Rocket Propellants
by John D. Clark
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to
repeat it.
George Santayana
IS
RUTGERS UNIVERSITY PRESS
New Brunswick, New Jersey
Copyright © 1972 by Rutgers University, the State University of New Jersey
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 72-185390
ISBN: 0-8135-0725-1
Manufactured in the United Suites of America by Quinn & Boden Company, Inc.,
Rithway, New Jersey
This book is dedicated to my wife Inga, who
heckled me into writing it with such wifely re
marks as, "You talk a hell of a fine history. Now
set yourself down in front of the typewriter —
and write the damned thing!"
In Re John D. Clark
by Isaac Asimov
I first met John in 1942 when I came to Philadelphia to live. Oh, I
had known of him before. Back in 1937, he had published a pair of
science fiction shorts, "Minus Planet" and "Space Blister," which had
hit me right between the eyes. The first one, in particular, was the
earliest science fiction story I know of which dealt with "anti-matter"
in realistic fashion.
Apparently, John was satisfied with that pair and didn't write any
more s.f., kindly leaving room for lesser lights like myself.
In 1942, therefore, when I met him, I was ready to be awed. John,
however, was not ready to awe. He was exactly what he has always
been, completely friendly, completely self-unconscious, completely
himself.
He was my friend when I needed friendship badly. America had
just entered the war and I had come to Philadelphia to work for the
Navy as a chemist. It was my first time away from home, ever, and I
was barely twenty-two. I was utterly alone and his door was always
open to me. I was frightened and he consoled me. I was sad and he
cheered me.
For all his kindness, however, he could not always resist the impulse
Io lake advantage of a greenhorn.
Kvery wall of his apartment was lined with books, floor to ceiling,
and he loved displaying them to me. He explained that one wall was
devoted to fiction, one to histories, one to books on military affairs
and so on.
In Re John D. Clark
X
"Here," he said, "is the Bible." Then, with a solemn look on his
face, he added, "I have it in the fiction section, you'll notice, under
J-"
"Why J?" I asked.
And John, delighted at the straight line, said, "J for Jehovah!"
But the years passed and our paths separated. The war ended and
I returned to Columbia to go after my PhD (which John had already
earned by the time I first met him) while he went into the happy busi
ness of designing rocket fuels.
Now it is clear that anyone working with rocket fuels is outstand
ingly mad. I don't mean garden-variety crazy or a merely raving luna
tic. I mean a record-shattering exponent of far-out insanity.
There are, after all, some chemicals that explode shatteringly, some
that flame ravenously, some that corrode hellishly, some that poison
sneakily, and some that stink stenchily. As far as I know, though, only
liquid rocket fuels have all these delightful properties combined into
one delectable whole.
Well, John Clark worked with these miserable concoctions and sur
vived all in one piece. What's more he ran a laboratory for seventeen
years that played footsie with these liquids from Hell and never had
a time-lost accident.
My own theory is that he made a deal with the Almighty. In return
for Divine protection, John agreed to take the Bible out of the fiction
section.
So read this book. You'll find out plenty about John and all the
other sky-high crackpots who were in the field with him and you may
even get (as I did) a glimpse of the heroic excitement that seemed to
make it reasonable to cuddle with death every waking moment —to
say nothing of learning a heck of a lot about the way in which the
business of science is really conducted.
It is a story only John can tell so caustically well from the depths
within.
Preface
Millions of words have been written about rocketry and space travel,
and almost as many about the history and development of the rocket.
But if anyone is curious about the parallel history and development
of rocket propellants — the fuels and the oxidizers that make them
go —he will find that there is no book which will tell him what he
wants to know. There are a few texts which describe the propellants
currently in use, but nowhere can he learn why these and not some
thing else fuel Saturn V or Titan II, or SS-9. In this book I have tried
to make that information available, and to tell the story of the de
velopment of liquid rocket propellants: the who, and when, and where
and how and why of their development. The story of solid propellants
will have to be told by somebody else.
This is, in many ways, an auspicious moment for such a book. Liq
uid propellant research, active during the late 40's, the 50's, and
the first half of the 60's, has tapered off to a trickle, and the time
seems ripe for a summing up, while the people who did the work are
still around to answer questions. Everyone whom I have asked for in
formation has been more than cooperative, practically climbing into
my lap and licking my face. I have been given reams of unofficial and
quite priceless information, which would otherwise have perished with
the memories of the givers. As one of them wrote to me, "What an
opportunity to bring out repressed hostilities!" I agree.
My sources were many and various. Contractor and government
agency progress (sometimes!) reports, published collections of papers
presented at: various meetings, the memories of participants in the
XIl Preface
story, intelligence reports; all have contributed. Since this is not a for
mal history, but an informal attempt by an active participant to tell
the story as it happened, I haven't attempted formal documentation.
Particularly as in many cases such documentation would be embar
rassing—not to say hazardous! It's not only newsmen who have to pro
tect their sources.
And, of course, I have drawn on my own records and recollections.
For something more than twenty years, from 1 November 1949, when
I joined the U.S. Naval Air Rocket Test Station, until 2 January 1970,
when I retired from its successor, the Liquid Rocket Propulsion Lab
oratory of Picatinny Arsenal, I was a member of the unofficial, but
very real, liquid propellant community, and was acutely aware of what
was going on in the field, in this country and in England. (It wasn't
until the late 50's that it was possible to learn much about the work in
the Soviet Union, and propellant work outside these three countries
has been negligible.)
The book is written not only for the interested layman —and for
him I have tried to make things as simple as possible — but also for the
professional engineer in the rocket business. For I have discovered
that he is frequently abysmally ignorant of the history of his own pro
fession, and, unless forcibly restrained, is almost certain to do some
thing which, as we learned fifteen years ago, is not only stupid but is
likely to result in catastrophe. Santayana knew exactly what he was
talking about.
So I have described not only the brilliantly conceived programs of
research and development, but have given equal time to those which,
to put it mildly, were not so well advised. And I have told the stories
of the triumphs of propellant research; and I have described the nu
merous blind alleys up which, from time to time, the propellant com
munity unanimously charged, yapping as they went. ,
This book is opinionated. I have not hesitated to give my own opin
ion of a program, or of the intelligence —or lack of it —of the pro
posals made by various individuals. I make no apology for this, and
can assure the reader that such criticism was not made with the ad
vantage of 20-20 hindsight. At one point, in writing this book, when
I had subjected one particular person's proposals to some rather caus
tic criticism, I wondered whether or not I had felt that way at the time
they were made. Delving into my (very private) logbook, I found that
I had described them then, simply as "Brainstorms and bullbleep!"
So my opinion had not changed —at least, not noticeably.
I make no claim to completeness, but I have tried to give an accu
rate account of the main lines of research. If anyone thinks that I
Preface xiii
have unreasonably neglected his work, or doesn't remember things
as I do, let him write to me, and the matter will be set right in the
next (d.v.) edition. And if I seem to have placed undue emphasis on
what happened in my own laboratory, it is not because my laboratory
was unusual (although more nutty things seem to have happened there
than in most labs) but that it was not, so that an account of what hap
pened there is a good sample of the sort of things which were hap
pening, simultaneously, in a dozen other laboratories around the
country.
The treatment of individuals' names is, I know, inconsistent. The
fact that the family name of somebody mentioned in the text is pre
ceded by his given name rather than by his initials signifies only that
I know him very well. Titles and degrees are generally ignored. Ad
vanced degrees were a dime a dozen in the business. And the fact that
an individual is identified in one chapter with one organization, and
with another in the next, should be no cause for confusion. People
in the business were always changing jobs. I think I set some sort of
a record by staying with the same organization for twenty years.
One thing that is worth mentioning here is that this book is about a
very few people. The propellant community —comprising those di
recting or engaged in liquid propellant research and development —
was never large. It included, at the most, perhaps two hundred peo
ple, three-quarters of whom were serving merely as hands, and doing
what the other quarter told them to do. That one quarter was a re
markably interesting and amusing group of people, including a sur
prisingly small number (compared to most other groups of the same
size) of dopes or phoneys. We all knew each other, of course, which
made for the informal dissemination of information at a velocity ap
proaching that of light. I benefited particularly from this, since, as I
was working for Uncle, and not for a rival contractor, nobody hes-
ilaled to give me "proprietory" information. If I wanted the straight
dope from somebody, I knew I could get it at the bar at the next pro
pellant meeting. (Many of the big propellant meetings were held in
hotels, whose management, intelligently, would always set up a bar
just outside the meeting hall. If the meeting wasn't in a hotel, I'd just
look around for the nearest cocktail lounge; my man would probably
he there.) I would sit down beside him, and, when my drink had ar
rived, ask, "Joe, what did happen on that last test firing you made?
Sure, I've read your report, but I've written reports myself. What
really happened?" Instant and accurate communication, without pain.
Conformists were hard to find in the group. Almost to a man, they
were howling individualists. Sometimes they got along together —
XlV Preface
sometimes they didn't, and management had to take that into account.
When Charlie Tait left Wyandotte, and Lou Rapp left Reaction Mo
tors, and they both came to Aerojet, the management of the latter,
with surprising intelligence, stationed one of them in Sacramento and
one in Azusa, separated by most of the length of the state of Califor
nia. Lou had been in the habit, when Charlie was giving a paper at a
meeting, of slipping a nude or two into Charlie's collection of slides,
and Charlie was no longer amused.
But friends or not, or feuding or not, everything we did was done
with one eye on the rest of the group. Not only were we all intellectual
rivals — "anything you can do I can do better" —but each of us knew
that the others were the only people around competent to judge his
work. Management seldom had the technical expertise, and since most
of our work was classified, we couldn't publish it to the larger scien
tific community. So praise from the in-group was valued accordingly.
(When Irv Classman, presenting a paper, mentioned "Clark's clas
sical work on explosive sensitivity," it put me on cloud nine for a week.
Classical, yet!) The result was a sort of group Narcissism which was
probably undesirable — but it made us work like Hell.
We did that anyway. We were in a new and exciting field, possibil
ities were unlimited, and the world was our oyster just waiting to be
opened. We knew that we didn't have the answers to the problems in
front of us, but we were sublimely confident of our ability to find them
in a hurry, and set about the search with a "gusto" — the only word for
it —that I have never seen before or since. I wouldn't have missed the
experience for the world. So, to my dear friends and once deadly ri
vals, I say, "Gentlemen, I'm glad to have known you!"
John D. Clark
Newfoundland, NJ.
January 1971
Contents
In Re John D. Clark ix
Preface xi
1 How It Started 3
2 Peenemunde and JPL 12
3 The Hunting of the Hypergol . . . 24
4 ... and Its Mate 47
5 Peroxide — Always a Bridesmaid 66
6 Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 72
7 Performance 90
8 Lox and Flox and Cryogenics in General 103
9 What Ivan Was Doing 115
10 "Exotics" 120
11 The Hopeful Monoprops 131
12 High Density and the Higher Foolishness 174
13 What Happens Next 190
Glossary 193
Index 197
IGNITION!
1
How It Started
The dear Queen had finally gone to her reward, and King Edward
VII was enjoying himself immensely as he reigned over the Empire
upon which the sun never set. Kaiser Wilhelm II in Germany was
building battleships and making indiscreet remarks, and in the United
States President Theodore Roosevelt was making indiscreet remarks
and building battleships. The year was 1903, and before its end the
Wright brothers' first airplane was to stagger briefly into the air. And
in his city of St. Petersburg, in the realm of the Czar of All the Rus-
sias, a journal whose name can be translated as "Scientific Review"
published an article which attracted no attention whatsoever from
anybody.
Its impressive but not very informative title was "Exploration of
Space with Reactive Devices," and its author was one Konstantin
Eduardovitch Tsiolkovsky, an obscure schoolteacher in the equally
obscure town of Borovsk in Kaluga Province.
The substance of the article can be summarized in five simple state
ments.
1. Space travel is possible.
2. This can be accomplished by means of, and only by means of,
rocket propulsion, since a rocket is the only known propulsive
device which will work in empty space.
3. Gunpowder rockets cannot be used, since gunpowder (or smoke
less powder either, for that matter) simply does not have enough
energy to do the job.
4. Certain liquids do possess the necessary energy.
4 Ignition
5. Liquid hydrogen would be a good fuel and liquid oxygen a good
oxidizer, and the pair would make a nearly ideal propellant com
bination.
The first four of these statements might have been expected to
raise a few eyebrows if anybody had been listening, but nobody was,
and they were received with a deafening silence. The fifth statement
was of another sort entirely, and a few years earlier would have been
not merely surprising, but utterly meaningless. For liquid hydrogen
and liquid oxygen were new things in the world.
Starting with Michael Faraday in 1823, scientists all over Europe
had been trying to convert the various common gases to liquids — cool
ing them, compressing them, and combining the two processes. Chlo
rine was the first to succumb, followed by ammonia, carbon dioxide,
and many others, and by the seventies only a few recalcitrants still
stubbornly resisted liquefaction. These included oxygen, hydrogen
and nitrogen (fluorine had not yet been isolated and the rare gases
hadn't even been discovered), and the holdouts were pessimistically
called the "permanent gases."
Until 1883. In April of that year, Z. F. Wroblewski, of the Univer
sity of Krakow, in Austrian Poland, announced to the French Acad
emy that he and his colleague K. S. Olszewski had succeeded in their
efforts to liquefy oxygen. Liquid nitrogen came a few days later, and
liquid air within two years. By 1891 liquid oxygen was available in ex
perimental quantities, and by 1895 Linde had developed a practical,
large-scale process for making liquid air, from which liquid oxygen
(and liquid nitrogen) could be obtained, simply by fractional distilla
tion.
James Dewar (later Sir James, and the inventor of the Dewar flask
and hence of the thermos botde), of the Royal Institute in London,
in 1897 liquefied fluorine, which had been isolated by Moisson only
eleven years before, and reported that the density of the liquid was
1.108. This wildly (and inexplicably) erroneous value (the actual den
sity is 1.50) was duly embalmed in the literature, and remained there,
unquestioned, for almost sixty years, to the confusion of practically
everybody.
The last major holdout —hydrogen —finally succumbed to his ef
forts, and was liquefied in May of 1898. And, as he triumphantly re
ported, "on the thirteenth of June, 1901, five liters of it (liquid hydro
gen) were successfully conveyed through the streets of London from
the laboratory of the Royal Institution to the chambers of the Royal
Society!"
How It Started 5
And only then could Tsiolkovsky write of space travel in a rocket
propelled by liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. Without Wroblewski
and Dewar, Tsiolkovsky would have had nothing to talk about.
In later articles, Tsiolkovsky discussed other possible rocket fuels
— methane, ethylene, benzene, methyl and ethyl alcohols, turpentine,
gasoline, kerosene — practically everything that would pour and burn,
but he apparently never considered any oxidizer other than liquid
oxygen. And although he wrote incessantly until the day of his death
(1935) his rockets remained on papei. He never did anything about
them. The man who did was Robert H. Goddard.
As early as 1909 Dr. Goddard was thinking of liquid rockets, and
came to the same conclusions as had his Russian predecessor (of whom
he had never heard); that liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen would
be a near-ideal combination. In 1922, when he was Professor of Phys
ics at Clark University, he started actual experimental work on liquid
rockets and their components. Liquid hydrogen at that time was prac
tically impossible to come by, so he worked with gasoline and liquid
oxygen, a combination which he used in all of his subsequent experi
mental work. By November 1923 he had fired a rocket motor on the
test stand, and on March 16, 1926, he achieved the first flight of a
liquid-propelled rocket. It flew 184 feet in 2.5 seconds. (Exactly forty
years later, to the day, Armstrong and Scott were struggling desper
ately to bring the wildly rolling Gemini 8 under control.)
One odd aspect of Goddard's early work with gasoline and oxygen
is the very low oxidizer-to-fuel ratio that he employed. For every
pound of gasoline he burned, he burned about 1.3 or 1.4 pounds of
oxygen, when three pounds of oxygen would have been closer to the
optimum. As a result, his motors performed very poorly, and seldom
achieved a specific impulse of more than 170 seconds. (The specific
impulse is a measure of performance of a rocket and its propellants.
It is obtained by dividing the thrust of the rocket in pounds, say, by
the consumption of propellants in pounds per second. For instance,
if the thrust is 200 pounds and the propellant consumption is one
pound per second, the specific impulse is 200 seconds.) It seems prob
able that he worked off-ratio to reduce the combustion temperature
and prolong the life of his hardware — that is, simply to keep his motor
from burning up.
The impetus for the next generation of experimenters came in
J 923, from a book by a completely unknown Transylvanian German,
one Herman Oberth. The title was Die Rakete zu den Planetenraumen,
or The Rocket into Planetary Space, and it became, surprisingly, some
thing of a minor best seller. People started thinking about rockets —
6 Ignition
practically nobody had heard of Goddard, who worked in exaggerated
and unnecessary secrecy— and some of the people who thought about
rockets decided to do something about them. First, they organized
societies. The Verein fur Raumschiffart, or Society for Space Travel,
generally known as the VfR, was the first, in June 1927. The Ameri
can Interplanetary Society was founded early in 1930, the British
Interplanetary Society in 1933, and two Russian groups, one in Len
ingrad and one in Moscow, in 1929. Then, they lectured and wrote
books about rockets and interplanetary travel. Probably the most
important of these was Robert Esnault-Pelterie's immensely detailed
L'Astronautique, in 1930. And Fritz Lang made a movie about space
travel— Frau in Mond, or The Woman on the Moon, and hired Oberth as
technical adviser. And it was agreed that Lang and the film company
(UFA) would put up the money necessary for Oberth to design and
build a liquid-fueled rocket which would be fired, as a publicity stunt,
on the day of the premiere of the movie.
The adventures of Oberth with the movie industry — and vice versa
— are a notable contribution to the theater of the absurd (they have
been described elsewhere, in hilarious detail), but they led to one
interesting, if abortive, contribution to propellant technology. Foiled
in his efforts to get a gasoline-oxygen rocket flying in time for the
premiere of the movie (the time available was ridiculously short)
Oberth designed a rocket which, he hoped, could be developed in a
hurry. It consisted of a long vertical aluminum tube with several rods
of carbon in the center, surrounded by liquid oxygen. The idea was
that the carbon rods were to burn down from the top at the same rate
as the oxygen was to be consumed, while the combustion gases were
ejected through a set of nozzles at the top (forward) end of the rocket.
He was never able to get it going, which was probably just as well, as
it would infallibly have exploded. But — it was the first recorded design
of a hybrid rocket —one with a solid fuel and a liquid oxidizer. (A
"reverse" hybrid uses a solid oxidizer and a liquid fuel.)
At any rate, the premiere came off on October 15, 1929 (without
rocket ascent), and the VfR (after paying a few bills) fell heir to
Oberth's equipment, and could start work on their own in early 1930.
But here the story starts to get complicated. Unknown to the VfR-
or to anybody else — at least three other groups were hard at work.
F. A. Tsander, in Moscow, headed one of these. He was an aeronau
tical engineer who had written extensively — and imaginatively — on
rockets and space travel, and in one of his publications had suggested
that an astronaut might stretch his fuel supply by imitating Phileas
Fogg. When a fuel tank was emptied, the astronaut could simply grind
How It Started 7
it up and add the powdered aluminum thus obtaining to the remaining
fuel, whose heating value would be correspondingly enhanced! This
updated emulation of the hero of Around the World in Eighty Days, who,
when he ran out of coal, burned up part of his ship in order to keep
the rest of it moving, not unnaturally remained on paper, and
Tsander's experimental work was in a less imaginative vein. He
started work in 1929, first with gasoline and gaseous air, and then, in
1931, with gasoline and liquid oxygen.
Another group was in Italy, headed by Luigi Crocco, and financed,
reluctantly, by the Italian General Staff.*
Crocco started to work on liquid rockets in 1929, and by the early
part of 1930 was ready for test firings. His work is notable not only
for the surprising sophistication of his motor design, but above all for
his propellants, He used gasoline for his fuel, which is not surprising,
but for his oxidizer he broke away from oxygen, and used nitrogen
tetroxide, N O . This was a big step — nitrogen tetroxide, unlike oxy
2 4
gen, can be stored indefinitely at room temperature — but nobody out
side of his own small group heard of the work for twenty-four years! f
V. P. Glushko, another aeronautical engineer, headed the rocket
group in Leningrad. He had suggested suspensions of powdered
beryllium in oil or gasoline as fuels, but in his first firings in 1930, he
used straight toluene. And he took the same step —independently —as
had Crocco. He used nitrogen tetroxide for his oxidizer.
The VfR was completely unaware of all of this when they started
work. Oberth had originally wanted to use methane as fuel, but as it
was hard to come by in Berlin, their first work was with gasoline and
* The fact that the whole project was headed by a General G. A. Crocco is no coinci
dence. He was Luigi's father, and an Italian father is comparable to a Jewish mother.
t In a letter to El Comercio, of Lima, Peru, 7 October, 1927, one Pedro A. Paulet, a
Peruyian chemical engineer, claimed to have experimented —in 1895-97 (!) — with a
rocket motor burning gasoline and nitrogen tetroxide. If this claim has any foundation
in fact, Paulet anticipated not only Goddard but even Tsiolkovsky.
However, consider these facts. Paulet claimed that his motor produced a thrust of
200 pounds, and that it fired intermittently, 300 times a minute, instead of continuously
as conventional rocket motors do.
He also claimed that he did his experimental work in Paris.
Now, I know how much noise a 200-pound motor makes. And I know that if one
were fired three hundred times a minute —the rate at which a watch ticks —it would
sound like a whole battery of fully automatic 75 millimeter antiaircraft guns. Such a
racket would have convinced the Parisians that the Commune had returned to take its
vengeance on the Republic, and would certainly be remembered by somebody beside
Paulet! But only Paulet remembered.
In my book, Paulet's claims are completely false, and his alleged firings never took
place.
8 Ignition
oxygen. Johannes Winkler, however, picked up the idea, and work
ing independently of the VfR, was able to fire a liquid oxygen-liquid
methane motor before the end of 1930. This work led nowhere in
particular, since, as methane has a performance only slightly superior
to that of gasoline, and is much harder to handle, nobody could see
any point to following it up.
Much more important were the experiments of Friedrich Wilhelm
Sander, a pyrotechnician by trade (he made commercial gunpowder
rockets) who fired a motor early in March 1931. He was somewhat
coy about his fuel, calling it merely a "carbon carrier," but Willy Ley
has suggested that it may well have been a light fuel oil, or benzene,
into which had been stirred considerable quantities of powdered car
bon or lampblack. As a pyrotechnician, Sander would naturally think
of carbon as the fuel, and one Hermann Noordung (the pseudonym
of Captain Potocnik of the old Imperial Austrian army), the year be
fore, had suggested a suspension of carbon in benzene as a fuel. (The
idea was to increase the density of the fuel, so that smaller tanks might
be used.) The important thing about Sander's work is that he intro
duced another oxidizer, red fuming nitric acid. (This is nitric acid
containing considerable quantities —5 to 20 or so percent —of dis
solved nitrogen tetroxide.) His experiments were the start of one of
the main lines of propellant development.
Esnault-Pelterie, an aviation pioneer and aeronautical engineer,
during 1931, worked first with gasoline and oxygen, and then with
benzene and nitrogen tetroxide, being the third experimenter to
come up, independently, with this oxidizer. But that was to be a re
peating pattern in propellant research — half a dozen experimenters
generally surface simultaneously with identical bones in their teeth!
His use of benzene (as Glushko's of toluene) as a fuel is rather odd.
Neither of them is any improvement on gasoline as far as performance
goes, and they are both much more expensive. And then Esnault-
Pelterie tried to use tetranitromethane, C(N0 ) for his oxidizer, and
2 4
promptly blew off four fingers. (This event was to prove typical of
TNM work.)
Glushko in Leningrad took up where Sander had left off, and from
1932 to 1937 worked with nitric acid and kerosene, with great success.
The combination is still used in the USSR. And in 1937, in spite of
Esnault-Pelterie's experience, which was widely known, he success
fully fired kerosene and tetranitromethane. This work, however, was
not followed up.
Late in 1931 Klaus Riedel of the VfR designed a motor for a new
combination, and it was fired early in 1932. It used liquid oxygen, as
How It Started 9
usual, but the fuel, conceived by Riedel and Willy Ley, was a 60-40
mixture of ethyl alchol and water, The performance was somewhat
below that of gasoline, but the flame temperature was much lower,
cooling was simpler, and the hardware lasted longer. This was the
VfR's major contribution to propellant technology, leading in a
straight line to the A-4 (or V-2) and it was its last. Wernher von Braun
started work on his PhD thesis on rocket combustion phenomena at
Kummersdorf-West in November 1932 under Army sponsorship,
the Gestapo moved in on the rest of the VfR, and the society was
dead by the end of 1933.
Dr. Eugen Sanger, at the University of Vienna, made a long series
of firings during 1931 and 1932. His propellants were conventional
enough —liquid (or sometimes gaseous) oxygen and a light fuel oil —
but he introduced an ingenious chemical wrinkle to get his motor
firing. He filled the part of his fuel line next to the motor with
diethyl zinc, to act as what we now call a "hypergolic starting slug."
When this was injected into the motor and hit the oxygen it ignited
spontaneously, so that when the fuel oil arrived the fire was already
burning nicely. He also compiled a long list, the first of many, of
possible fuels, ranging from hydrogen to pure carbon, and calculated
the performance of each with oxygen and with N O . (The latter,
2 5
being not only unstable, but a solid to boot, has naturally never been
used.) Unfortunately, in his calculations he somewhat naively assumed
100 percent thermal efficiency, which would involve either (a) an
infinite chamber pressure, or (b) a zero exhaust pressure firing into a
perfect vacuum, and in either case would require an infinitely long
nozzle, which might involve some difficulties in fabrication. (Thermal
efficiencies in a rocket usually run around 50 or 60 percent.) He also
suggested that ozone might be used as an oxidizer, and as had
Tsander, that powdered aluminum might be added to the fuel.
Then Luigi Crocco, in Italy, had another idea, and was able to talk
the Ministry of Aviation into putting up a bit of money to try it out.
The idea was that of a monopropellant. A monopropellant is a liquid
which contains in itself both the fuel and the oxidizer, either as a
single molecule such as methyl nitrate, CH NO in which the oxygens
3 3
can burn the carbon and the hydrogens, or as a mixture of a fuel and
an oxidizer, such as a solution of benzene in N O . On paper, the idea
2 4
looks attractive. You have only one fluid to inject into the chamber,
which simplifies your plumbing, your mixture ratio is built in and
stays where you want it, you don't have to worry about building an
injector which will mix the fuel and the oxidizer properly, and things
are simpler all around. But! Any intimate mixture of a fuel and an
10 Ignition
oxidizer is a potential explosive, and a molecule with one reducing
(fuel) end and one oxidizing end, separated by a pair of firmly crossed
fingers, is an invitation to disaster.
All of which Crocco knew. But with a species of courage which can
be distinguished only with difficulty from certifiable lunacy, he started
in 1932 on a long series of test firings with nitroglycerine (no less!)
only sightly tranquilized by the addition of 30 percent of methyl
alchohol. By some miracle he managed to avoid killing himself, and
he extended the work to the somewhat less sensitive nitromethane,
CH NO . His results were promising, but the money ran out in 1935,
3 2
and nothing much came of the investigation.
Another early monopropellant investigator was Harry W. Bull,
who worked on his own at the University of Syracuse. By the middle
of 1932 he had used gaseous oxygen to burn gasoline, ether, kerosene,
fuel oil, and alcohol. Later he tried, without success, to burn alcohol
with 30 percent hydrogen peroxide (the highest strength available
in the U.S. at the time), and to burn turpentine with (probably 70 per
cent) nitric acid. Then, in 1934 he tried a monopropellant of his own
invention, which he called "Atalene," but did not otherwise identify.
It exploded and put him in the hospital. Dead end.
And Helmuth Walter, at the Chemical State Institute in Berlin, in
1934 and 1935 developed a monopropellant motor which fired 80
percent hydrogen peroxide, which had only lately become available.
When suitably catalyzed, or when heated, hydrogen peroxide de
composes into oxygen and superheated steam, and thus can be used
as a monopropellant. This work was not made public — the Luftwaffe
could see uses for it —but it was continued and led to many things in
the next few years.
The last strictly prewar work that should be considered is that of
Frank Malina's group at GALCIT. (Guggenheim Aeronautical Lab
oratories, California Institute of Technology.) In February of 1936
he planned his PhD thesis project, which was to be the development of
a liquid-fueled sounding rocket. The group that was to do the job
was gradually assembled, and was complete by the summer of 1937:
six people, included Malina himself, John W. Parsons, the chemist of
the group, Weld Arnold, who put up a little money, and Hsu Shen
Tsien, who, thirty years later, was to win fame as the creator of
Communist China's ballistic missiles. The benign eye of Theodore von
Karman watched over the whole.
The first thing to do was to learn how to run a liquid rocket motor,
and experimental firings, with that object in view, started in October
1936. Methanol and gaseous oxygen were the propellants. But other
How It Started U
propellants were considered, and by June 1937, Parsons had com
piled lists, and calculated the performances (assuming, as had
Sanger, 100 percent efficiency) of dozens of propellant combinations.
In addition to Sanger's fuels, he listed various alcohols and saturated
and unsaturated hydrocarbons, and such exotic items as lithium
methoxide, dekaborane, lithium hydride, and aluminum triemethyl.
He listed oxygen, red fuming nitric acid, and nitrogen tetroxide as
oxidizers.
The next combination that the group tried then, was nitrogen te
troxide and methanol. Tests began in August 1937. But Malina, in
stead of working outdoors, as any sane man would have done, was so
ill advised as to conduct his tests in the Mechanical Engineering build
ing, which, on the occasion of a misfire, was filled with a mixture of
methanol and N O fumes. The latter, reacting with the oxygen and
2 4
the moisture in the air, cleverly converted itself to nitric acid, which
settled corrosively on all the expensive machinery in the building.
Malina's popularity with the establishment suffered a vertiginous
drop, he and his apparatus and his accomplices were summarily
thrown out of the building, and he was thereafter known as the head
of the "suicide squad." Pioneers are seldom appreciated.
But the group continued work, until July 1, 1939, when, at the
instigation of General Hap Arnold, the Army Air Corps sponsored a
project to deveLop a JATO — a rocket unit to help heavily laden planes
take off from short runways.
From now on, rocket research was to be paid for by the military,
and was to be classified. GALCIT had lost her virginity with Malina's
first explosion. Now she had lost her amateur standing.
2
Peenemunde and JPL
Von Braun started work on his PhD thesis (rocket combustion
processes) in November 1932. All of his experimental work was done
at Kummersdorf-West, an artillery range near Berlin —and the
Reichswehr paid the freight, and built up a rocket establishment
around him. When he got his degree, in 1937, he was made the tech
nical director of the organization, which was soon moved to Peene
munde. There the A-4, better known by its propaganda name
"V-2" was designed and developed.
Very little propellant development was involved in the A-4. From
the beginning, liquid oxygen was the intended oxidizer, and 70-30
alcohol-water mixture (as had been used by the VfR) the fuel. And
Helmuth Walter's 80 percent hydrogen peroxide was used to drive
the fuel pumps. The peroxide entered a decomposition chamber,
where it was mixed with a small quantity of a solution of calcium per
manganate in water. This catalyzed its decomposition into oxygen and
superheated steam, which drove the turbines which drove the pumps
which forced the oxygen and the alcohol into the main combustion
chamber.
The A-4 was a long range strategic weapon, not designed to be
fired at a moment's notice. It was perfectly practical to set it up, and
then load it with alcohol and oxygen just before firing. But the
Reichswehr needed antiaircraft rockets that were always ready to
fire. When you get word from your forward observers that the
bombers are on the way, you don't have time to load up a missile
with liquid oxygen. What you need is a storable propellant—one
Peenemunde and JPL 13
that can be loaded into the tanks beforehand — and kept there until
you push the button. You can't do that with oxygen, which cannot
be kept liquid above —119°C, its critical temperature, by any pressure
whatsoever.
The Reichswehr was rather slow to realize the need for AA rockets
— maybe they believed Hermann Goering when he boasted, "If the
British ever bomb Berlin, you can call me Meyer!" —but when they
did they found that work on storable propellants was well under way.
It was, at first, concentrated at Helmuth Walter's Witte Werke at Kiel.
As has been mentioned, high strength hydrogen peroxide (80-83 per
cent) first became available in about 1934, and Walter had fired it as
a monopropellant, and the Luftwaffe was immensely interested. Like
General Arnold, in the U.S. they could appreciate the fact that a
JATO rocket would enable a bomber to take off with a heavier load
than it could normally carry, and by February 1937, a Walter hydro
gen peroxide JATO had helped a Heinkel Kadett airplane to get off
the ground. Later in the year, a rocket powered airplane was flown —
again using a hydrogen peroxide motor. The Messerschmitt 163-A
interceptor used the same propellant.
But peroxide is not only a monopropellant, it's also a pretty good
oxidizer. And Walter worked out a fuel for it that he called "C-Stoff."
(The peroxide itself was called "T-Stoff.") Hydrazine hydrate,
N H -H O ignited spontaneously when it came in contact with per
2 4 2
oxide (Walter was probably the first propellant man to discover such
a phenomenon) and C-Stoff consisted of 30 percent hydrazine hy
drate, 57 of methanol, and 13 of water, plus thirty milligrams per liter
of copper as potassium cuprocyanide, to act as an ignition and com
bustion catalyst. The reason for the methanol and the water was the
fact that hydrazine hydrate was hard to come by — so hard, in fact, that
by the end of the war its percentage in C-Stoff was down to fifteen.
The Messerschmitt 163-B interceptor used C-Stoff and T-Stoff.
The next organization to get into the rocket business was the Aero
nautical Research Institute at Braunschweig. There, in 1937-38, Dr.
Otto Lutz and Dr. Wolfgang C. Noeggerath started to work on the
C-Stoff-T-Stoff combination. Next, BMW (Bavarian Motor Works-
yes, the people who make the motorcycles) were invited by the Luft
waffe to get into the act. Helmut Philip von Zborowski, the nephew
of the famous pre-World War 1 racing driver, was in charge of the
operation, and Heinz Mueller was his second. In the summer of 1939
BMW got a contract to develop a JATO unit, using the C-T-Stoff com
bination, and they worked with it for some months. But von Zbor
owski was convinced that 98 percent nitric acid was the better oxi-
14 Ignition
dizer, as well as being immensely easier to get (LG. Farben guaranteed
unlimited quantities), and set out to convert the brass to his point of
view. From the beginning of 1940, he and Mueller worked on the ni
tric acid-methanol combination, and in 1941 proved his point, con
vincingly, with a perfect thirty-second run at the three thousand
pounds force thrust level. He even convinced Eugen Sanger, who was
sure that oxygen was the only oxidizer worth thinking about.
And in the meantime, early in 1940, he and Mueller had made an
immensely important discovery — that certain fuels (aniline and tur
pentine were the first they found) ignited spontaneously upon con
tact with nitric acid. Noeggerath learned of this, and joined the BMW
people in their search for fuels with this interesting property. His
code name for nitric acid was "Ignol" and for his fuels "Ergol," and,
a fast man with a Greek root, he came up with "Hypergol" for the
spontaneous igniters. "Hypergol" and its derivatives, such as the ad
jective "hypergolic" have become a permanent part not only of the
German, but of the English language, and even, in spite of the efforts
of Charles de Gaulle to keep the language "pure," of the French as
well.
The discovery of hypergolicity was of major importance. Running
a rocket motor is relatively easy. Shutting it down without blowing
something up is harder. But starting it up without disaster is a real
problem. Sometimes electrical igniters are used — sometimes pyro
technic devices. But neither can always be trusted, and either is a nui
sance, an added complication, when you already have more complica
tions than you want. Obviously, if your combination is hypergolic, you
can throw out all the ignition schemes and devices, and let the chem
istry do the work. The whole business is much simpler and more re
liable.
But as usual, there's a catch. If your propellants flow into the cham
ber and ignite immediately, you're in business. But if they flow in,
collect in a puddle, and then ignite, you have an explosion which gen
erally demolishes the engine and its immediate surroundings. The
accepted euphemism for this sequence of events is a "hard start."
Thus, a hypergolic combustion must be very fast, or it is worse than
useless. The Germans set an upper limit of 50 milliseconds on the
ignition delay that they could tolerate.
Incidentally, and to keep the record straight, Zborowski named his
propellants after plants. Nitric acid he called "Salbei" for sage, and
his fuels "Tonka," after the bean from which coumarin, which smells
like vanilla, is extracted. Considering the odors of the things he
worked with, I can't think of more inappropriate namesl
Peenemunde and JPL 15
The first ignition delay tests were, to put it mildly, somewhat prim
itive. After a long night session, searching through old chemistry
texts for substances that were violently reactive with nitric acid, Zbor-
owski and Mueller would soak a wiping rag with a promising candi
date and spray it with nitric acid and see how quickly —or if—it burst
into flames. And they ran into a peculiar phenomenon. An old, used
wiping rag from the machine shop would sometimes ignite much
faster than a new clean one soaked with the same fuel. Their chem
istry laboratory furnished them with the answer. Traces of iron and
copper from the shop, as the metals or as salts, catalyzed the ignition
reaction. So they modified their 98 percent nitric acid, "Salbei" by
adding to it 6 percent of hydrated ferric chloride, and called the new
oxidizer "Salbeik."
The wiping-rag technique was soon supplanted by a somewhat more
sophisticated gadget with which you could drop a single drop of a
candidate fuel into a thimbleful of acid, and determine its hypergolic
properties with less risk of setting fire to the whole shop, and for the
next four years BMW on the one hand and Noeggerath on the other
were trying the hypergolicity of everything they could lay their hands
on. At BMW, where propellant development was directed by Hermann
Hemesath, more than 2000 prospective fuels were tried. And very
soon the I.G. Farben organization at Ludwigshaven started doing the
same thing. With a deplorable lack of imagination, Farben eschewed
code names at first, and labeled their mixtures with code numbers
likeT93/4411.
The fuels that the three organizations developed were many and
various, but at the same time very much alike, since there was a lim
ited number of compounds which were hypergolic with nitric acid —
and available in any quantity. Tertiary amines, such as triethyl amine
were hypergolic, and aromatic amines, such as aniline, toluidine, xyl-
idine, N methyl aniline were even more so. Most of the mixtures tried
— neat fuels consisting of a single pure compound were unheard of—
were based on the aniline family, frequently with the addition of tri-
ethylamine, plus, at times, things like xylene, benzene, gasoline, tet-
rahydrofuran, pyrocatechol, and occasionally other aliphatic amines.
The BMW Tonka 250 comprised 57 percent of raw xylidine and 43
of triethylamine (it was used in the "Taifun" missile) and Tonka 500
contained toluidine, triethylamine, aniline, gasoline, benzene, and
raw xylidine. Noeggerath added furfuryl alcohol to Tonka 250 to get
"Ergol-60" which he considered the "best" hypergol, and reported,
somewhat wistfully, that furfuryl alcohol was readily available in the
United States—as it was not in Germany.
16 Ignition
As soon as one of the investigators found a mixture that he liked he
applied for a patent on it. (Such an application would probably not
even be considered under the much stricter U.S. patent laws.) Not
surprisingly, everybody and Hemesath and Noeggerath in particular,
was soon accusing everybody else of stealing his patent. In 1946, when
Heinz Mueller came to this country, he met Noeggerath again, and
found him still indignant, bursting out with "And BMW, especially
Hemesath, did swipe a lot of patents from us!"
Around 1942 or 1943 I.G. Farben shifted the emphasis of their fuel
work away from the mixtures they had been working with at first, and
which were so similar to the Tonkas and the Ergols, to a series of fuels
based on the "Visols," which were vinyl ethers. The vinyl ethers were
very rapidly hypergolic with MS-IO, a mixed acid consisting of 10 per
cent sulfuric acid and 90 percent nitric, and the ignition delay was less
sensitive to temperature than it was with straight nitric. (This had been
a serious problem. A propellant pair might ignite in 50 milliseconds
at room temperature, and wait around a whole second at 40 below.)
Also, it was believed, practically as an article of faith, that MS-10 did
not corrode stainless steel. This was a delusion that lasted five years
before it was punctured.
A typical mixture, patented by Dr. Heller in 1943, consisted of 57.5
percent Visol-1 (vinylbutyl ether) or Visol-6 (vinylethyl ether) 25.8
percent Visol-4 (divinylbutanediolether) 15 percent aniline, and 1.7
percent of iron pentacarbonyl or iron naphthenate. (Heller had to
put his iron catalyst in his fuel rather than in his oxidizer, since the
latter contained sulfuric acid, and iron sulfates are insoluble in nitric
acid.) There were many variations on these fuels, vinylisobutyl ether
being substituted at times for the n-butyl compound. All in all, more
than 200 mixtures were tried, of which less than ten were found sat
isfactory. "Optolin" was a mixture of aniline, a Visol, aromatics, some
times amines, gasoline, and pyrocatechol. The Wasserfall SAM used
a Visol fuel.
Several agencies tried to discover additives which, in small quan
tities, would make gasoline or benzene or methanol hypergolic with
acid. Things like iron carbonyl and sodium selenide were more or less
successful, but the success was academic at best, since the useful ad
ditives were all either too rare, too expensive, or too active to live
with.
But nitric acid was definitely the winner. Many German missiles
were designed, at first, to use peroxide, but as the war went on, the
Walter Type XVII submarines threatened to use up the whole pro
duction, and as the nitric acid work was so successful, the shift to the
Peenemunde and JPL 17
latter oxidizer for missile work was inevitable. During this period
many other combinations than those actually tried were considered,
and theoretical performances were calculated. These calculations were
not the early naive estimates of Sanger et al., but considered the com
bustion pressure, the exhaust pressure, thermal efficiency, tempera
ture of combustion, dissociation — the whole business. Such exact cal
culations are outrageously tedious —a single one done with a desk
calculator, can easily take a whole day. But Dr. Grete Range and others
struggled through them, considering as fuels, alcohol, alcohol-water,
gasoline, diesel fuel, ammonia, propargyl alcohol, and God only knows
what else, and as oxidizers, oxygen, nitric acid, N O , tetranitro-
2 4
methane, ozone, and OF , although the laboratory men were never
2
able to lay their hands on enough of the last to characterize it. And as
early as 1943 they were thinking of using chlorine trifluoride, which
before that had been nothing but a laboratory curiosity. But it had
recently been put into production — its intended use was an incendiary
agent —and they calculated its performance too, with ammonia and
with such oddities as a suspension of carbon in water.
One calculation made at this time by Dr. Noeggerath, showed that
if the propellants in the A-4 were replaced by nitric acid and diesel
fuel, the range of the missile would be increased by an appreciable
percentage — not because their propellants had a better performance
than the oxygen-alcohol combination actually used, which they did
not, but because their higher density allowed more propellant to be
stuffed into the tanks. This calculation had no particular effect at that
time, although the A-IO, a planned successor to the A-4, was to have
used the new combination, but some years later, in Russia, the con
sequences were to be hilarious.
The oxidizer that was always a "might have been" was tetranitro-
methane. It's a good oxidizer, with several advantages. It's storable,
has a better performance than nitric acid, and has a rather high den
sity, so you can get a lot of it in a small tank. But it melts at+14.10C
so that at any time other than a balmy summer day it's frozen solid.
And it can explode —as Esnault-Pelterie had discovered, and it took
out at least one German laboratory. The eutectic mixture with N O ,
2 4
64 percent TNM, 36 N O , doesn't freeze above —3O0C, and is con
2 4
siderably less touchy than is straight TNM, but it was still considered
dangerous, and Noeggerath refused to have anything to do with it or,
even to permit it in his laboratory. But the engineers kept looking at
it wistfully, and when they received a (completely false) intelligence
report that it was being used on a large scale in the United States, the
Germans heroically started synthesis, and had accumulated some eight
18 Ignition
or ten tons of the stuff by the end of the war. Nobody ever found any
use for it.
Another idea which didn't get anywhere, was that of a heteroge
neous fuel —a suspension, or slurry, of a powdered metal, such as
aluminum, in a liquid fuel such as gasoline. This had been suggested
by several writers, among them Tsander in Russia and Sanger in
Austria, and Heinz Mueller of BMW tried it out, using powdered
aluminum or magnesium in diesel oil. The performance was very
poor —the chamber pressure was 50 to 100 psi instead of the 300 they
were shooting for —due to the incomplete combustion of the metal.
But the other results were spectacular. The motor was fired in a hori
zontal position against an inclined wall to deflect the exhaust stream
upwards. But the unburned metal particles settled down and deco
rated all the pine trees in the vicinity with a nice, shiny, silvery coating
— very suitable for Christmas trees. The slurry idea was to emerge
again twenty years later, to drive another generation of experimenters
crazy.
Experimentation on monopropellants (which were called "Moner-
gols") continued until the end of the war. In 1937-1938 a good deal
of work was attempted with solutions of N O or NH NO in ammonia.
2 4 3
(The latter mixture, under the name of Driver's solution, had been
known for many years.) The only result of these experiments was a
depressing series of explosions and demolished motors. And at
Peenemunde, a Dr. Wahrmke tried dissolving alcohol in 80 percent
H O and then firing that in a motor. It detonated, and killed him.
2 2
The Wm. Schmidding firm, nevertheless, kept on experimenting
with a monopropellant they called "Myrol," an 80-20 mixture of
methyl nitrate and methanol — very similar to the nitroglycerine-
methanol mixture that Crocco had tried years before. They managed
to fire the material, and got a fairly respectable performance, but
they were plagued by explosion after explosion, and were never able
to make the system reliable.
And there was finally the propellant combination that the BMW
people and those at ARIB called the "Lithergols" — which was really
a throwback to the original hybrid motor tried by Oberth during the
UFA period. Peroxide or nitrous oxide, N O, was injected into a
2
motor in which several sticks of porous carbon were secured. Nitrous
oxide can decompose exothermically into oxygen and nitrogen, as
peroxide does to oxygen and steam, and can thus act as a monopro
pellant, but the experimenters wanted to get extra energy from the
combustion of the carbon by the oxygen formed. When they sur
rendered to the Americans at the end of the war, they assured their
Peenemunde and JPL 19
captors that just a little more engineering work was needed to make
the system work properly. Actually some twenty years elapsed before
anybody could make a hybrid work.
Meanwhile, back at the ranch —
The most striking thing about propellant research in the United
States during the war years is how closely it paralleled that in Ger
many. True, there was no American A-4, and high strength hydrogen
peroxide was unobtainable in this country, but the other develop
ments were closely similar.
As mentioned in the first chapter, GALCIT's first job for the armed
forces was to produce a JATO to help the Army Air Corps get its
bombers off the ground. And the Air Corps demanded a storable
oxidizer — they were not, repeat not, going to fool around with liquid
oxygen.
So the first order of business was choosing an oxidizer. Oxygen and
ozone, neither of them storable, were obviously out. Chlorine had
insufficient energy, and Malina, Parsons, and Forman who, with the
assistance of Dr. H. R. Moody, did a survey of the subject, considered
that N O was impractical. It is difficult to say why, but the extremely
2 4
poisonous nature of the beast may have had something to do with its
rejection. They considered 76 percent perchloric acid, and tetranitro-
methane, and finally settled on red fuming nitric acid, RFNA, con-
(aining 6 or 7 percent N O . They tried crucible burning of various
2 4
fuels with this acid —gasoline, petroleum ether, kerosene, methyl
and ethyl alcohol, turpentine, linseed oil, benzene, and so on, and
found that the acid would support combustion. Further, they found
(hat hydrazine hydrate and benzene were hypergolic with it, although
(hey had never heard of the word, so acid it was. There is a highly
nonprophetic statement in the final Report for 1939-1940, Air Corps
Jet Propulsion Research, GALCIT-JPL Report No. 3, 1940. (By now
Malina's group had become the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, with von
Karman at the head.)
"The only possible source of trouble connected with the acid is its
corrosive nature, which can be overcome by the use of corrosion-
resistant materials." Ha! If they had known the trouble that nitric
acid was to cause before it was finally domesticated, the authors would
probably have stepped out of the lab and shot themselves.
Be that as it may, the report was an excellent survey of the field as
it was at that time, and contained sophisticated and accurate perform
ance calculations. The procedure had been developed in Malina's
1040 PhD thesis, and was essentially and inevitably the same as that
developed in Germany. One of the first compilations of the thermo-
20 Ignition
dynamic properties of exhaust gases was published by J. O. Hirsch-
felder in November 1942, as necessary raw data for such computa
tions.
Malina and company started experimental work with RFNA and
gasoline as early as 1941—and immediately ran into trouble. This is
an extraordinarily recalcitrant combination, beautifully designed to
drive any experimenter out of his mind. In the first place, it's almost
impossible to get it started. JPL was using a spark plug for ignition,
and more often than not, getting an explosion rather than the smooth
start that they were looking for. And when they did get it going, the
motor would cough, chug, scream and hiccup —and then usually
blow anyway. Metallic sodium suspended in the fuel helped the igni
tion somewhat, and benzene was a little better than gasoline —but
not much, or enough. It took an accidental discovery from the other
side of the country to solve their immediate problems.
Here we must backtrack. From 1936 to 1939, Robert C. Truax,
then a midshipman at the U.S. Naval Academy, had been experiment
ing with liquid fueled rockets, on his own time and with scrounged
material. He graduated, spent the required two years on sea duty, and
in 1941, then a lieutenant commander, was ordered to the Engineer
ing Experiment Station at Annapolis, with orders to develop a JATO.
For the Navy was having trouble getting their underpowered and
overloaded PBM and PBY patrol bombers off the water. And he, too,
ran into ignition and combustion difficulties. But one of his small
staff, Ensign Stiff, while working on gas generators (small combustion
devices designed to supply hot gas under pressure) discovered that
aniline and RFNA ignited automatically upon contact. (Such dis
coveries are usually surprising, not to say disconcerting, and one
wonders whether or not Ensign Stiff retained his eyebrows.)
At any rate, Frank Malina, visiting EES in February of 1942, learned
of this discovery, and instantly phoned JPL in Pasadena; and JPL im
mediately switched from gasoline to aniline. And their immediate dif
ficulties miraculously disappeared. Ignition was spontaneous and im
mediate, and combustion was smooth. They had a 1000-pound thrust
motor running by the first of April (these people were professionals
by that time) and on the fifteenth it boosted an A20-A medium bomber
into the air — the first flight of a liquid JATO in the United States.
Truax, of course, adopted the propellant combination, and early
in 1943, hanging two 1500 pound units on a PBY, managed to get the
much overloaded Dumbo off the water.
Other people were working on JATO's for the Navy, among them
Professor Goddard himself, whose unit was successfully flown in a
Peenemunde and JPL 21
PBY in September 1942 —the first Navy JATO. He used his classic
combination of liquid oxygen and gasoline, but Reaction Motors, also
active in the field, came up with an ingenious variation.
Reaction Motors, Inc., generally called RMI, was founded in 1941
by a handful of veterans of the Americal Rocket Society including
James WyId, Lovell Lawrence, and John Shesta, and undertook to
build a JATO unit. They first used liquid oxygen — all the ARS work
had been with that oxidizer —and gasoline. But they found that the
combination was too hot, and burned out their motors. So, as the gas
oline entered the chamber, they mixed it with water through a meter
ing valve. Combustion was smoother, and the motor stayed in one
piece. This was a somewhat less elegant solution to the problem of
combustion temperatures than was that used by the VfR (and Peene
munde) when they mixed water with their alcohol fuel. The RMI unit
was successfully flown in the PBM in 1943. During the trials, run on
the Severn River, the exhaust jet set the tail of the seaplane on fire,
but the test pilot rose (or sank) to the occasion and set the plane down,
(ail first on the water in the manner of an old time movie comedian
with his coattails on fire, seating himself hurriedly in a washtub full
of water, with appropriate hissing noises and clouds of steam.
The aniline-RFNA combination had the one —but magnificent—
virtue that it worked. Otherwise it was an abomination. In the first
place, aniline is much harder to come by than gasoline — particularly
in the midst of a dress-shirt war, when everybody and his brother
wants to use it for explosives and what not. Second, it is extremely
poisonous, and is rapidly absorbed through the skin. And third, it
Ireezes at — 6.2°C, and hence is strictly a warm-weather fuel. The
Army and the Navy both, in a rare example of unanimity, screamed
at the thought of using it. But they had no choice.
Two closely interwound lines of research characterize the rest of
I lie war period. One was designed to reduce the freezing point of
imiline, the other was to make gasoline, somehow, hypergolic with
nilric acid. American Cyanamid was given a contract to investigate
stddkives which might have the latter effect and JPL worked both sides
of I he street, as well as experimenting with changes in the composi
tion of the acid. Besides their usual RFNA, containing about 6 per-
(TiIl N O , they experimented with one containing about 13 per-
2 4
(flit, as well as with a mixed acid rather similar to that the Germans
Wf to using, but a little more potent. One mixture they used contained
HM percent nitric acid, 9.6 percent sulfuric, and 2.4 percent SO . (This
3
WHN very similar to the mixed acids used in explosives manufacture.)
And they, too, believed that it didn't corrode stainless steel.
22 Ignition
The obvious way to lower the freezing point of aniline is to mix it
with something else — preferably something that is as hypergolic as the
aniline itself. And the obvious way to make gasoline hypergolic is to
mix it with something that is. Both lines of endeavor were pursued
with enthusiasm.
At LPL they mixed aniline with orthotoluide, its near relative, and
got a eutectic freezing at —32°C. But o-toluidine was as scarce as ani
line, and although the mixture was successfully fired, it never became
operational. A more practical additive was furfuryl alcohol, for which
Zborowski was pining. Furfuryl alcohol comes from oat hulls and
Quaker Oats had tank cars of the stuff, which they were delighted to
sell to anybody who would take it off their hands. And 20 percent of
furfuryl alcohol in aniline reduced the freezing point to 0°F, or
—17.8°C, and the eutectic mixture, 51 percent aniline, 49 furfuryl al
cohol, had a freezing point of —42°C. And furfuryl alcohol itself was
about as hypergolic as aniline.
And to gasoline, JPL added aniline, diphenylamine, mixed xylidines
and other relatives of aniline; assorted aliphatic amines, and every
thing else they could think of, and then measured the ignition delay.
But they never found an additive which, in small percentages, would
make gasoline rapidly hypergolic, with either RFNA or mixed acid.
One of their best additives was mixed xylidines, but it took about 50
percent of the xylidines in the mixture to make it reliably and rapidly
hypergolic—which took it out of the additives class, and made it a
major component. To make it more discouraging, there were no pro
duction facilities for the xylidines in the United States, and although
Aerojet looked at a similar mixture' a few years later (in 1949) it never
came to anything.
American Cyanamid was having a similar experience. They started
with #2 fuel oil, diesel oil, and gasoline, and added to the particular
fuel aniline, dimethylaniline, mono- and diethylaniline, crude mono-
ethylaniline — and turpentine. Most of their work was done with mixed
acid, a little with RFNA, and some with straight 98 percent nitric acid
(White Fuming Nitric Acid, or WFNA). And in no case did they find
an effective additive. But they found that turpentine was magnificently
hypergolic with mixed acid or RFNA, and might well be a good fuel
all by itself. (And think of all those lovely votes from the piney woods
of the South!)
Aerojet Engineering was founded in March of 1942, to act, essen
tially, as the manufacturing arm of JPL. The founders were von Kar-
man, Malina, Parsons, Summerfield, and Forman, all of JPL, plus
Andrew Haley, who was von Karman's attorney. And they started
P eenemunde and JPL 23
their own propellant research program, although for some years it
was difficult to disentangle it from JPL's.
Aerojet was the first organization to work extensively with crude
N-ethyl aniline, sometimes called monoefhylaniline, as a fuel. This is
almost as rapidly hypergolic as aniline. The crude or commercial
product contains about 10 percent diethylaniline and 26 straight ani
line, the remainder being the monoethyl compound, and its freezing
point is about — 63CC. All in all, it was an elegant answer to the
freezing point problem, but it was just about as poisonous as its an
cestor, and just as hard to come by.
But it could be lived with. The propellants for the Aerojet JATO,
in production by the end of the war, were mixed acid and mono-
ethylaniline, as were those of RMI's motor for the Navy's surface-to-
air missile, Lark, whose development started in 1944. The surface-to-
surface Corporal, started the same year, was designed around the
RFNA-aniline-furfuryl alcohol combination.
Three organizations worked on monopropellants during the war
although the effort was limited. All of them concentrated on nitro-
methane. JPL worked on it first, in 1944, or earlier, and found that
its combustion was improved by the addition of small quantities of
chromium trioxide (later chromium acetylacetonate) to the fuel. Aero
jet also worked with it, and found that it was necessary to desensitize
it by the addition of 8 percent of butyl alcohol. And Bob Truax, at
KES, tried his hand — and was almost killed when somebody connected
l he wrong pipe to the right valve and the tank blew. And finally Dave
Altaian, at JPL, tried a mixture of benzene and tetranitromethane,
which naturally detonated at once.
And then the war was over, and the German work came to light—
and things started to get really complicated.
3
The Hunting of the
Hypergol . . .
As the American interrogators moved into Germany close behind —
and sometimes ahead of—the armies, they found the German rocket
scientists more than willing to surrender (and get new jobs) and more
than anxious to tell everything they knew. Not only did the Americans
get almost all the top scientists — they got everything else that wasn't
nailed down, including the complete Peenemunde archives (which von
Braun's crew had thoughtfully deposited in an abandoned mine) and
all the A-4 rockets, complete or otherwise. And, red-blooded young
Americans all, with larceny in their hearts, they liberated every mil
ligram of hydrazine hydrate and high-strength hydrogen peroxide
that they could find in Germany. Plus, naturally, the special alumi
num tank cars built to carry the latter. Everything was promptly
shipped to the United States.
These steps were obvious. The next step was not.
The alcohol-oxygen combination seemed all right for long-range
missiles, but the United States had no immediate plans for building
such things. The Tonkas and Visols were no improvements on mono-
ethylaniline, or on the aniline-furfuryl alcohol mixtures that had been
developed in the U.S. And there was nothing new about nitric acid.
The Americans thought they knew all about it —as had the Germans.
Unwarranted euphoria and misplaced confidence are international
phenomena.
They had no doubt that missiles, guided and ballistic, were to be the
artillery of the future. The question —or one of many—was the iden
tity of the optimum propellant combination for a given, or projected,
The Hunting of the Hypergol . . . 25
missile. And so everybody even remotely connected with the business
made his own survey of every conceivable fuel and oxidizer, and tried
to decide which ones to choose. Lemmon, of JPL, presented the re
sults of such a comprehensive survey to the Navy in the spring of
1945, and a half a dozen more, by North American Aviation, Reaction
Motors, the Rand Corporation, M. W. Kellogg Co., and others, ap
peared in the next few years. Each survey listed the characteristics of
every propellant, or prospective propellant, that the compiler could
think of, and presented the results of dozens of tedious performance
calculations. To the surprise of nobody with any chemical sophistica
tion at all, everybody came to just about the same conclusions.
There were two sets of these. The first related to long-range ballis
tic missiles, or to rockets designed to orbit an artificial satellite. (As
early as 1946 both the Air Force and the Navy were making serious
studies of the problem of orbiting an artificial Earth satellite.) In these
applications, cryogenics (substances that cannot be liquefied except
at very low temperatures) could be used. And here everybody agreed
that:
1. The optimum oxidizer is liquid oxygen. ("Fluorine might be
good, but its density is too low, and it's a holy terror to handle.")
2. As far as performance is concerned, liquid hydrogen is tops as a
fuel. (But it was extremely hard to handle, and to come by, and
its density is so low that the necessary tankage would be im
mense.) Below hydrogen it didn't much matter. Alcohol, gas
oline, kerosene — they'd all work pretty well, and could be lived
with. ("But maybe somebody could do something with things
like diborane and pentaborane?" Their performances, as cal
culated, looked awfully impressive. "Sure, they were rare and
expensive and poisonous to boot, but — ?")
The second set of conclusions — or the lack of them —concerned
things like JATO's and short range tactical missiles, which had to use
Hlorable propellants. Here the conclusions were less definite.
I. The available oxidizers were nitric acid, hydrogen peroxide (as
soon as it could be got into production in the United States) and
nitrogen tetroxide. (But N O and 90 percent peroxide both
2 4
froze at —110C, and if you want to fight a war in, say, Siberia in
February, or in the stratosphere — ?) It looked as though nitric
acid, in one of its variants, was the most likely candidate. ("Of
course, if the freezing points of the other two could be reduced
somehow — ? And what about weirdies like CIF -?")
3
26 Ignition
2. The conclusions were much less clean-cut when storable fuels
were considered. With few exceptions, none of the possible fuels
had a performance much better than any of the others. Deci
sions would have to be made based on their secondary charac
teristics: availability, hypergolicity, smoothness of combustion,
toxicity, and so on. The one important exception was hydrazine.
(Not the hydrazine hydrate the Germans had been using, but
anhydrous N H . Dave Horvitz, at RMI, fired the hydrate with
2 4
oxygen in 1950, but I am not aware of any other experiments,
in this country at least, in which it was involved. Almost all the
hydrazine hydrate looted from Germany was converted to the
anhydrous base before being distributed for testing. One method
of conversion was to reflux the hydrate over barium oxide, and
then to distil over the anhydrous hydrazine under reduced pres
sure.) Hydrazine was hypergolic with the prospective oxidizers,
it had a high density for a fuel (1.004) and its performance was
definitely better than those of the other prospective fuels. But
— its freezing point was 1.50C higher than that of water! And it
cost almost twenty dollars a pound. So two things obviously had
to be done —get the price of hydrazine down, and somehow,
lower the freezing point. (And again, there was that haunting
thought of pentaborane — ?)
There was one subject on which everybody agreed. Nobody was
going to put up with the aniline-RFNA combination for one moment
longer than he had to. The acid was so corrosive to anything you
wanted to make propellant tanks out of that it had to be loaded into
the missile just before firing, which meant handling it in the field.
And when poured it gives off dense clouds of highly poisonous NO ,
2
and the liquid itself produces dangerous and extremely painful burns
when it touches the human hide. And . . . but nitric acid and the
struggle to domesticate it deserve, and will get, a chapter all to them
selves.
The aniline is almost as bad, but a bit more subtle in its actions. If
a man is spashed generously with it, and it isn't removed immediately,
he usually turns purple and then blue and is likely to die of cyanosis
in a matter of minutes. So the combination was understandably un
popular, and the call went out for a new one that was, at least, not
quite so poisonous and miserable to handle.
Kaplan and Borden at JPL suggested one at the beginning of 1946.
This was WFNA and straight furfuryl alcohol. Furfuryl alcohol was
about as harmless as any propellant was likely to be, and WFNA,
The Hunting of the Hypergol. . . 27
while it was just as corrosive as RFNA, and was just as hard on the
anatomy, at least didn't give off those clouds of NO . They fired the
2
combination in a WAC Corporal motor, comparing it to the 20 per
cent furfuryl alcohol, 80 percent aniline mixture and RFNA, and
found no measurable difference in performance between the two
systems. (The WAC Corporal was conceived as a sounding rocket,
the "Little Sister" to the 20,000 pound thrust "Corporal" then under
development. It was the ancestor of the Aerobee.) And, as a bonus,
they found that ignition was fast and smooth, and much more tolerant
to water in the acid than was the Corporal combination.
At about the same time, RMI was making a similar set of tests.
These were all run in a 220-pound thrust Lark motor, whose mixed-
acid, monoethylaniline combination was the reference propellant
system. They used three fuels —80 octane gasoline, furfuryl alcohol,
and turpentine; and three types of nitric acid oxidizer —mixed acid,
WFNA, and RFNA containing 15% N O .* They used a hypergolic
2 4
starting slug on the gasoline firings, and rather surprisingly, got
good results with all three acids. Furfuryl alcohol was no good with
mixed acid. The combination was smoky and messy, and the reaction
of the sulfuric acid of the MA with the alcohol produced a weird
collection of tars, cokes, and resins, which quite clogged up the motor.
But furfuryl alcohol was excellent with RFNA and WFNA, starting
considerably smoother than did their reference propellants. And
turpentine gave hard starts with RFNA and WFNA, but with MA
started off like a fire hose. So that was one of the two combinations
that they preferred. The other was furfuryl alcohol and WFNA (the
RFNA performed a little better, but those NO fumes!), although
2
neat furfuryl alcohol freezes at—31°C —rather too high for comfort.
Many other fuels were tried during the late 40's and early 50's.
At JPL mixtures of aniline with ethanol or with isopropanol were
investigated and burned with RFNA. Ammonia was fired there (with
RFNA) as early as 1949, and the next year Cole and Foster fired it
with N O . The M. W. Kellogg Co. burned it with WFNA, and by 1951,
2 4
R. J. Thompson of that company was beating the drum for this com
bination as the workhorse propellant for all occasions. Reaction
Motors experimented with mixtures of ammonia and methylamine
(Io reduce the vapor pressure of the ammonia) and showed that the
addition of 1.5 percent of dekaborane made ammonia hypergolic
with WFNA, while the Bendix Corp., in 1953, showed that the same
* Interestingly enough, the first stage of Diamant, which put the first French satellite
into orbit, burns turpentine and RFNA.
28 Ignition
end could be achieved by flowing the ammonia over lithium wire
just upstream of the injector.
JPL fired various oddities with RFNA, such as furfural and two
methylated and partially reduced pyridines, tetrapyre and penta-
prim. The object of these tests is not readily apparent, nor is the rea
son why RMI bothered to fire cyclooctatetraene with WFNA. The
fuel is not only expensive and hard to get, but it has a very high
freezing point and has nothing in particular to recommend it. And
the reason that the Naval Air Rocket Test Station went to the trouble
of burning ethylene oxide with WFNA is equally baffling. The Edison-
ian approach has much to recommend it, but can be run into the
ground. One of the oddest combinations to be investigated was tried
by RMI, who burned d-limonene with WFNA. d-limonene is a ter-
pene which can be extracted from the skins of citrus fruits, and all
during the runs the test area was blanketed with a delightful odor of
lemon oil. The contrast with the odors of most other rocket propel-
lants makes the event worth recording.
It had long since become obvious to everybody concerned that
firing a combination in a rocket motor is not the ideal way to find out
whether or not it is hypergolic — and, if it is, how fast it ignites. By
the nature of research more tests are going to fail than are going to
succeed, and more combinations are going to ignite slowly than are
going to light off in a hurry. And when the result of each delayed
ignition is a demolished motor, a screening program can become a
bit tedious and more than a bit expensive. So the initial screening
moved from the test stand into the laboratory, as various agencies
built themselves ignition delay apparatus of one sort or another.
Most of these devices were intended not only to determine whether
or not a combination was hypergolic, but also to measure the ignition
delay if it was. In construction they varied wildly, the designs being
limited only by the imagination of the investigator. The simplest
tester consisted of an eyedropper, a small beaker, and a finely cali
brated eyeball —and the most complicated was practically a small
rocket motor setup. And there was everything in between. One of the
fancier rigs was conceived by my immediate boss, Paul Terlizzi, at
NARTS. He wanted to take high-speed Schlieren (shadow) movies of
the ignition process. (What information he thought they would pro
vide escaped me at the time, and still does.) * There was a small ig-
* An incurable inventor of acronyms, he called it "STIDA," for Schlieren Type Igni
tion Delay Apparatus.
The Hunting of the Hypergol... 29
nition chamber, with high-speed valves and injectors for the propel-
lants under investigation. Viewing ports, a high-speed Fastex camera,
and about forty pounds of lenses, prisms, and what not, most of them
salvaged from German submarine periscopes, completed the setup.
Dr. Milton Scheer (Uncle Milty) labored over the thing for weeks,
getting all the optics lined up and focused.
Came the day of the first trial. The propellants were hydrazine and
WFNA. We were all gathered around waiting for the balloon to go
up, when Uncle Milty warned, "Hold it —the acid valve is leaking!"
"Go ahead —fire anyway!" Paul ordered.
I looked around and signaled to my own gang, and we started back
ing gently away, like so many cats with wet feet. Howard Streim
opened his mouth to protest, but as he said later, "I saw that dog-
eating grin on Doc's face and shut it again," and somebody pushed
the button. There was a little flicker of yellow flame, and then a bril
liant blue-white flash and an ear-splitting crack. The lid to the chamber
went through the ceiling (we found it in the attic some weeks later),
the viewports vanished, and some forty pounds of high-grade optical
glass was reduced to a fine powder before I could blink.
I clasped both hands over my mouth and staggered out of the lab,
to collapse on the lawn and laugh myself sick, and Paul stalked out in
a huff. When I tottered weakly back into the lab some hours later I
found that my gang had sawed out, carried away, and carefully lost,
some four feet from the middle of the table on which the gadget had
rested, so that Paul's STIDA could never, never, never be reassembled,
in our lab.
Other agencies had their troubles with ignition delay apparatus,
although their experiences weren't often as spectacular as ours, but
I hey eventually started cranking out results. Not too surprisingly,
no two laboratories got the same numbers, and from 1945 until 1955
one would be hard put to find a period when there wasn't a coopera
tive ignition delay program going on, as the various laboratories
I lied to reconcile their results. One of the difficulties was that the
different testers varied widely in the speed and the efficiency with
which they mixed the two reactants. And another lay in the fact that
dilferent criteria for ignition were used by various experimenters.
One might take the first appearance of flame (as shown by a photo
crll or an ionization gage or a high-speed camera) as the moment of
ignition, while another, with a micro-motor setup, might take the
moment at which his motor arrived at full thrust or the design cham
ber pressure.
30 Ignition
But although the various investigators didn't often come up with
the same numbers, they generally rated propellant combinations in
the same order. While they seldom agreed on the number of milli
seconds it took combination A to light off, they were generally in
complete agreement that it was a Hell of a lot faster than combina
tion B.
Which was enough for many purposes. After all, everybody knew
that WFNA and furfuryl alcohol were fast enough to live with, and
obviously, if something shows up on the tester as faster than that
combination it's probably worth trying in a motor.
Many laboratories worked in the field but Don Griffin at JPL and
Lou Rapp at RMI were early comers in ignition delay work. The
former organization, as was natural since Corporal was their baby,
did a lot of work on the aniline-furfuryl-alcohol mixture, and in
1948 determined that the mixture with the minimum ignition delay
consisted of 60 percent of the alcohol and 40 of aniline. This was
close to the 49FA, 51 aniline eutectic (melting point —43°C) and the
Corporal fuel (the missile was still under development) was changed
from the 20 percent FA mixture to a 50-50 one.
Otherwise, they confirmed the hypergolic reaction of furan com
pounds and of aromatic amines with nitric acid, and demonstrated
the beneficial effect of N O in the latter case. And they showed that
2 4
amines, particularly tertiary amines, and unsaturated compounds
were generally hypergolic, while aliphatic alcohols and saturates
generally were not. Most of their work was done with nitric acid, but
a good deal, from 1948 on, was done with N O , whose hypergolic
2 4
nature generally resembled that of acid.
Reaction Motors investigated the hypergolicity of similar com
pounds, as well as such things as the furans, vinyl and allyl amines,
and polyacetylenics, such as di-propargyl, with the skeleton structure
(without the hydrogens) C=C-C—C—G=C. And they found that
many silanes were hypergolic with acid. The University of Texas, in
1948, also worked with these, and showed that 30 percent of tetra-
allyl silane would make gasoline hypergolic. The University of Texas
also investigated the zinc alkyls, as Sanger had done sixteen years
earlier.
Standard Oil of California was the first of the oil companies to get
into rocket propellant research in a big way, when Mike Pino, at the
company's research arm, California Research, started measuring
ignition delays in the fall of 1948.
At first his work resembled that of the other workers, as he demon
strated fast ignition with dienes, acetylenics, and allyl amines. (Some
The Hunting of the Hypergol . . . 31
years later, in 1954, Lou Rapp at RMI assembled the results of all the
early ignition delay work, and attempted to make some generaliza
tions. His major conclusion was that the ignition of a hydrocarbon or
an alcohol involved the reaction of the acid with a double or triple
bond, and that if none existed it had to be created before the ignition
could take place. Later, in speaking of nitric acid, the plausibility of
this postulate will be examined.)
But then Pino, in 1949, made a discovery that can fairly be de
scribed as revolting. He discovered that butyl mercaptan was very
rapidly hypergolic with mixed acid. This naturally delighted Standard
of California, whose crudes contained large quantities of mercaptans
and sulfides which had to be removed in order to make their gasoline
socially acceptable. So they had drums and drums of mixed butyl
mercaptans, and no use for it. If they could only sell it for rocket fuel
life would indeed be beautiful.
Well, it had two virtues, or maybe three. It was hypergolic with
mixed acid, and it had a rather high density for a fuel. And it wasn't
corrosive. But its performance was below that of a straight hydro
carbon, and its odor — ! Well, its odor was something to consider.
Intense, pervasive and penetrating, and resembling the stink of an
enraged skunk, but surpassing, by far, the best efforts of the most
vigorous specimen of Mephitis mephitis. It also clings to the clothes and
the skin. But rocketeers are a hardy breed, and the stuff was duly and
successfully fired, although it is rumored that certain rocket mechan
ics were excluded from their car pools and had to run behind. Ten
years after it was fired at the Naval Air Rocket Test Station — NARTS
— the odor was still noticeable around the test areas. (And at NARTS,
with more zeal than judgment, I actually developed an analysis for it!)
California Research had an extremely posh laboratory at Richmond,
on San Francisco Bay, and that was where Pino started his investiga
tions. But when he started working on the mercaptans, he and his
accomplices were exiled to a wooden shack out in the boondocks at
least two hundred yards from the main building. Undeterred and
unrepentant, he continued his noisome endeavors, but it is very
much worth noting that their emphasis had changed. His next candi
dates were not petroleum by-products, nor were they chemicals
which were commercially available. They were synthesized by his
own crew, specifically for fuels. Here, at the very beginning of the
fiO's, the chemists started taking over from the engineers, synthesizing
nc:w propellants (which were frequently entirely new compounds) to
order, instead of being content with items off the shelf.
Anyhow, he came up with the ethyl mercaptal of acetaldehyde and
32 Ignition
the ethyl mercaptol of acetone, with the skeleton structures:
C
I
C—C—S—C—S—C—C and C—C—S—C—S—C—C
I I
C C
respectively. The odor of these was not so much skunk-like as garlicky,
the epitome and concentrate of all the back doors of all the bad Greek
restaurants in all the world. And finally he surpassed himself with
something that had a dimethylamino group attached to a mercaptan
sulfur, and whose odor can't, with all the resources of the English
language, even be described. It also drew flies. This was too much,
even for Pino and his unregenerate crew, and they banished it to a
hole in the ground another two hundred yards farther out into the
tule marshes. Some months later, in the dead of night, they surrep
titiously consigned it to the bottom of San Francisco Bay.
To understand the entry of the next group of workers into the pro-
pellant field, it's necessary to go back a bit and pick up another thread.
From the beginning, the services had disliked the fuels that the re
searchers had offered them, not only because of their inherent dis
advantages, but above all because they weren't gasoline. They already
had gasoline and used huge quantities of it —and why should they
have to bother with something else? But, as we have seen, gasoline is
not a good fuel to burn with nitric acid, and the services had to accept
the fact. Which they did, grudgingly. But all through the late 40's and
early 50's the Navy and the Air Force were busily changing over from
piston airplane engines to turbojets. And they started buying jet fuel
instead of gasoline, and the whole thing started all over again. They
demanded of the people designing their missiles that said missiles be
fueled with jet fuel.
Now, what is jet fuel? That depends. A turbojet has a remarkably
undiscriminating appetite, and will run, or can be made to run, on
just about anything that will burn and can be made to flow, from coal
dust to hydrogen. But the services decided, in setting up the specifica
tions for the jet fuel that they were willing to buy, that the most im
portant considerations should be availability and ease of handling.
So since petroleum was the most readily available source of thermal
energy in the country, and since they had been handling petroleum
products for years, and knew all about it, the services decided that jet
fuel should be a petroleum derivative —a kerosene.
The first fuel that they specified was JP-1, a rather narrow cut, high
paraffinic kerosene. The oil companies pointed out that not many re-
The Hunting of the Hypergot. . . 33
fineries in the country could produce such a product with their avail
able equipment and crudes, and that the supply might thus be some
what limited. So the next specification, for JP-3 (JP-2 was an exper
imental fuel that never got anywhere), was remarkably liberal, with a
wide cut (range of distillation temperatures) and with such permissive
limits on olefins and aromatics that any refinery above the level of a
Kentucky moonshiner's pot still could convert at least half of any
crude to jet fuel. This time they went too far, allowing such a large
fraction of low boiling constituents that a jet plane at high altitude
boiled off a good part of its fuel. So the cut was narrowed to avoid this
difficulty, but the permitted fractions of aromatics and olefins (25 and
5 percent respectively) were not reduced. The result was JP-4, with
just about the most permissive specifications to appear since the days
of Coal Oil Johnny Rockefeller the First. It is NATO standard, and the
usual fuel for everything from a Boeing 707 to an F-111. (JP-5 and 6
have arrived since, but haven't replaced JP-4. And RP-I is another
story, which will be told later.)
But trying to burn JP-3 or JP-4 in a rocket motor with nitric acid
was a harrowing experience. In the first place, the specifications being
what they were, no two barrels of it were alike. (A jet engine doesn't
care about the shape of the molecules it burns as long as they give up
the right number of BTU's per pound, but a nitric acid rocket is fus
sier.) It wasn't hypergolic with acid, but reacted with it to produce all
sorts of tars, goos, weird colored compounds of cryptic composition
— and troubles. And if you got it going — using a hypergolic slug, say —
sometimes everything went well, but usually not. It was acid-gasoline
all over again —a coughing, choking, screaming motor, that usually
managed to reduce itself to fragments, and the engineers to frustrated
blasphemy. Everything was tried to make the stuff burn smoothly,
from catalysts in the acid down —or up —to voodoo. The farthest-out
expedient that I heard of was tried at Bell Aeronautic.fSornebody had
the bright idea that the sonic vibrations of a rocket motor might pro
mote combustion. So he made a tape recording of the sound of a run
ning motor and played it back at the interacting propellants in the
hope that they might be shaken —or shamed —into smooth combus
tion. (Why not? He'd tried everything else!) But alas, this didn't work
either. Obviously JP was a lost cause as far as the rocket business was
concerned.
It was with this background that the Navy's program on "Rocket
Fuels Derivable from Petroleum" came into being in the spring of
1951, although it wasn't called that officially until the next year. If
you couldn't make JP work, maybe you could derive something else
34 Ignition
(cheaply, for choice) from petroleum that would. Or, one hoped, that
could be mixed with JP and make the latter burn smoothly over a rea
sonable mixture-ratio range.
The title of the program was deceptive. "Derivable" is an elastic
term, and it is to be doubted that the higher-ups of the Bureau of
Aeronautics realized what they had authorized. But the lower-level
chemist types in the Rocket Branch were perfectly aware of the fact
that a good chemist, given a little time and money, can derive just
about anything organic, up to RNA, from petroleum if he wants to.
The contractors were being told, in effect, "Go ahead, Mack —see what
you can come up with. And if it's any good, we'll find a way to make
it from petroleum —somehow!"
The contractors now joining their endeavors to those of California
Research were the Shell Development Co., Standard Oil of Indiana,
Phillips Petroleum, and the Chemical Engineering Department of
New York University (NYU). And for the next two or three years
there was a continuous ignition delay project going on. Each labora
tory, as it came up with a new hypergolic additive, would ship samples
to all the others, who would mix it with standard nonhypergolic fuels
and then measure the ignition delay of the mixtures. The standard
nonhypergols were generally toluene and n-heptane, although NYU,
presumably to assert its academic independence, used benzene and
n-hexane. (JP wasn't much use as a reference fuel, since no two lots
of it were alike.)
As for the fuels and/or additives that they synthesized, Shell and
NYU concentrated on acetylenic compounds, and Phillips put their
major effort into amines. As for Standard of Indiana, that organiza
tion went off on a wild tangent. Apparently jealous of their sister
company of California and determined to do them one better, they
went beyond mere sulfur compounds, and came down hard on phos
phorous derivatives. They investigated assorted substituted phos-
phines, from the timethyl phosphine, through butyl and octyl
phosphines, on to monochloro (dimethylamino) phosphine, and then
they settled happily on the alkyl trithiophosphites, with the general
formula (RS) P, where R could be methyl, ethyl, or whatever. The
3
one they gave the greatest play was "mixed alkyl trithiophosphites,"
which was a mixture of, mainly, the ethyl and methyl compounds.
Its virtues were those of the mercaptans — hypergolicity and good
density and no corrosion problems —but its vices were also those of
the mercaptans —exaggerated. The performance was below that of
the mercaptans, and the odor, while not as strong as those of the
Pino's creations, was utterly and indescribably vile. Furthermore,
The Hunting of the Hypergol , . . 35
their structures had an unnerving resemblance to those of the G
agents, or "nerve gases" or of some of the insecticides which so
alarmed Rachel Carlson. This disquietude was justified. When some
of the alkylthiophosphites were fired at NARTS, they put two rocket
mechanics in the hospital, whereupon they were summarily and vio
lently thrown off the station. Standard of Indiana plugged them hard,
and there was even a conference devoted to them in March of 1953,
but somehow they, like the mercaptans, never roused the enthusiasm
of the prospective users. Neither type of propellant, now, is anything
but a noisome memory.
The rationale behind the acetylenic work was clear enough. It had
been shown (by Lou Rapp and Mike Pino, among others) that double
and triple bonds aided hypergolic ignition, and it was reasonable
to assume that they might promote smooth combustion, if only by
furnishing the fuel molecule with a weak point where the oxidation
might start. Furthermore, the parent molecule of the family, acety
lene itself, had always been regarded hopefully by the workers in the
field. The extra energy conferred upon it by the triple bond should
lead to good performance, although the low percentage of hydrogen
in the molecule might work against it. (See the chapter on perform
ance.) But pure liquid acetylene was just too dangerous to live with —
having a lamentable tendency to detonate without warning and for
no apparent reason. Perhaps some of its derivatives might be less
temperamental. And these was another reason for looking at the acety-
lenics.
A good many people, in the early 50's, were considering some un
usual, not to say bizarre, propulsion cycles. Among these was the ram
rocket. This is a rocket, generally a monopropellant rocket, inside of
and surrounded by a ramjet. A ramjet will not function except at
high speed relative to the atmosphere, and hence has to be boosted
into operation by a rocket or some other means. If the enclosed rocket
of the ram rocket could get the device up to operating velocity, and
if the rocket exhaust gases were combustible and could act as the fuel
for the ramjet —well, then you could build a cruising missile that
didn't need a booster and with a lower specific fuel consumption than
a straight rocket. Say that you burned propyne, or methyl acetylene,
in a monopropellant rocket, and that the exhaust products were
largely methane and finely divided elementary carbon. Then the
carbon and the methane could be burned with air in the ramjet, going
Io water and carbon dioxide, and you would be making the best of
both worlds. (Ethylene oxide, C H O, whose major decomposition
2 4
products are methane and carbon monoxide, was considered for the
36 Ignition
same sort of cycle.) So the acetylenics looked good for the ram rocket.
And finally, the acetylenics are rather easy to produce from petro
leum feed-stock, by cracking and partial oxidation. The approaches
of NYU and of Shell to the acetylenic problem were completely dis
similar. NYU tried dozens of compounds of the family, while Shell
concentrated on just two, and then went hunting for additives which
would make them into useful fuels. One of the two was 1,6-hepta-
diyne, with the skeletal structure C=O-C—C—C—C=C. And the
other was 2-methyl-l-buten-3-yne, otherwise known as "iso-
propenyl acetylene" or "methyl vinyl acetylene," whose skeleton is
C
C=C-C=C. One source of confusion in the history of the acety
lenics is the multiplicity of systems by which they were named!
The first additives that they investigated thoroughly were methyl
derivatives of phosphorous triamide, P(NH ) , with methyl groups
2 3
substituted for from three to six of the hydrogens. They worked, but
so much of the additive was needed for proper ignition that it became
a major component of the mixture, and even then explosive ignition
was common.
Then they tried the derivative of 1,3,2-dioxaphospholane,
i
O
5C P2
4C O3
and finally settled on 2-dimethylamino-4-methyl-1,3,2-dioxaphospho
lane, which was usually, and mercifully, known as "Reference Fuel
208." Again, it wasn't a success as an additive, but taken neat, it was
one of the fastest hypergols ever seen. It wasn't particularly toxic, and
might have made a fairly good workhorse fuel, but before much work
had been done on it, events made it obsolete. It's all but forgotten
now.
Between 1951 and 1955 Happell and Marsel at NYU prepared and
characterized some fifty acetylenics: hydrocarbons, alcohols, ethers,
amines, and nitriles. They varied in complexity from propyne, or
methyl acetylene, C—C=C to such things as dimethyldivinyldiacetylen
C C
C=C—C=C—C=C—C=C with no less than four multiple bonds.
The climax of unsaturation came with butyne di-nitrile, or dicyano-
The Hunting of the Hypergol... 37 ,
acetylene, N=C—C=C—C=N which had no hydrogen atoms at all,
but rejoiced in the possession of three triple bonds. This was useless
as a propellant —it was unstable, for one thing, and its freezing point
was too high —but it has one claim to fame. Burning it with ozone in a
laboratory experiment, Professor Grosse of Temple University (who
always liked living dangerously) attained a steady state temperature
of some 6000 K, equal to that of the surface of the sun.
Many, if not most, of the acetylenics had poor storage properties,
and tended to change to tars or gels on standing. They also tended to
form explosive peroxides on exposure to the atmosphere. Many of
them were shock sensitive, and would decompose explosively with
little or no provocation. Something like divinyldiacetylene can fairly
be described as an accident looking for a place to happen. While
some of them were fired successfully in a rocket (RMI burned pro-
pyne, methylvinylacetylene methyldivinylacetylene, and dimethyl-
divinylacetylene, all with oxygen) they turned out not to be suitable
fuels for nitric acid. They usually detonated on contact with the oxi
dizer, as several possessors of piles of junk that had originally been
ignition delay equipment could testify, and did.
But some of them showed promise as monopropellants and as ad
ditives, and the Air Reduction Co., which had entered the field around
the middle of 1953, had propyne, methylvinylacetylene, and dimethyl-
divinylacetylene in commercial production by 1955.
Some of them were excellent additives for JP-4. By August, 1953,
RMI had shown that as little as 10 percent of methylvinylacetylene
in JP-4 led to smooth combustion with RFNA over a wide range of
mixture ratios, and greatly improved ignition. If a hypergolic slug
was used, transition to the working fuel was smooth and without in
cident, and, for that matter, ignition could easily be achieved with a
powder squib, and without a starting slug at all. Several of the others
had the same effect, but by the time that this was determined the acet
ylenics had been overtaken by history, and had been developed only
to be abandoned.
Homer Fox and Howard Bost ran the amine program at Phillips
Petroleum. The relationship of amines to petroleum is exiguous at
best, but they had been used as fuels for some time (triethylamine had
been used in the Tonkas) and looked good, although they had never
been examined systematically for propellant use. This Phillips pro
ceeded to do, and investigated amines in infinite variety. Primary, sec
ondary, and tertiary amines. Saturated and unsaturated amines, allyl
and propargyl amines. Monoamines, diamines, even triamines and
tetramines. They must have synthesized and characterized at least
38 Ignition
forty aliphatic amines, including a few with other functional groups
— OH groups and ether linkages.
They concentrated on the tertiary polyamines. This was logical
enough. They knew that tertiary amines were generally hypergolic
with nitric acid, and it was reasonable to think that a di- or tri-tertiary
amine might be more so. (Their guess turned out to be right, but one
is reminded of E. T. Bell's remark that the great vice of the Greeks
was not sodomy but extrapolation.) The compounds they investigated
ranged from 1,2 bis (dimethylamino) ethane, up to such curiosities as
1,2,3, tris (dimethylamino) propane and tetrakis (dimethylamino-
methyl) methane, which can be visualized as a neopentane molecule
with a dimethylamine group on each corner. Incidentally, it turned
out to have an unacceptably high freezing point, which, considering
the symmetry of the molecule, might have been expected. One is led
to suspect that some of the fancier amines were synthesized, not be
cause there was any reason to believe that they would be an improve
ment on the ones they already had, but to demonstrate the virtuosity
of the bench man, who wanted to prove that he could do it.
The tertiary diamines were the ones that really got a workout. Just
about every possible structural change, and its consequences, were in
vestigated. Thus they investigated the consequences of varying the
terminal groups, as in the series:
1,2 bis (dimethyl, or ethyl, or allylamino) ethane.
Or, of varying the length of the central hydrocarbon chain, as in:
1,1 methane
1,2 ethane
1,3 -bis (dimethylamino) propane
1,4 butane
1,6 hexane
They moved the amino groups around, as in:
1 2]
'J- bis (dimethylamino)-propane and
1,21
1,3 J bis (dimethylamino) butane.
1,4)
They examined the effect of unsaturation, in series like
butane
1,4 bis (dimethylamino) • 2 butene
.2 butyne
The Hunting of the Hypergol , . . 39
And they tried every conceivable permutation and combination of
these changes, as well as adding OH groups or ether linkages.
As might have been expected, introducing an hydroxyl group pro
duced a compound which was excessively viscous at low temperatures.
(Triethanolamine, which had been considered as a fuel, is an extreme
example of this effect, and therefore was never used.) The allyl-ter-
minated amines were also rather viscous, and were subject to atmos
pheric oxidation. Otherwise, as might have been expected, they were
all very much alike, the complicated ones being in no way superior to
the simple compounds, as might also have been expected.
None of them was any good as a jet fuel additive. They neither im
proved combustion nor, except in overwhelming proportions, made
the jet fuel hypergolic. However, they looked promising as straight
fuels, and Phillips shipped samples of four of them to the Wright Air
Development Center to be test fired. They were all of the bis (di-
methylamino) type, the 1,2 ethane, the 1,2, and 1,3 propane, and the
1,3-1 butene,
At WADC, in 1956, Jack Gordon checked out their properties and
logistics, and fired them with RFNA. They were good fuels. Ignition
was hypergolic and fast, combustion was good and performance was
respectable, and the saturated ones, at least, were quite stable to heat
and suitable for regenerative cooling.
And they, too, were obsolete at birth.
For all this work had been done, as it were, with the left hand. Hy
drazine was the name of the big game. That was the fuel that every
body wanted to use. High performance, good density, hypergolic with
the storable oxidizers —it had everything. Almost.
Its price was high, but the nature of the chemical industry being
what it was, and is, one could be confident that it would come down
to a reasonable figure when anybody wanted it in quantity. It was
somewhat sensitive to catalytic decomposition, but if you used the
right materials to make your tanks of, and were reasonably careful
about cleanliness, that was no real problem. But that freezing point
— 1.5°C —was just too high for anything that was going to be used in
a tactical missile. The services were awfully coy about setting definite
limits on the freezing point of propellants that they would accept —
one had the feeling that they would demand the impossible and then
settle for what they could get —but they finally decided that — 65°F,
or -540C, would be acceptable for most purposes. (Although the Navy,
during one whimsical period, demanded a freezing point no higher
than —10O0F. How they would fight a war at that temperature they
didn't specify. One is tempted to believe that they were carried away
by the magnificent evenness of the number.)
40 Ignition
So everybody was trying to bring the freezing point of hydrazine
down to —54°. And without adversely affecting its other —and good —
properties. Which turned out to be impossible. This could have been
predicted, but at that time we were all hoping for miracles.
From first to last, at least eight agencies were involved in the effort,
Aerojet, JPL, the Metalectro Co., NARTS, Naval Ordnance Test Sta
tion (NOTS), North American Aviation, Reaction Motors, and Syra
cuse University.
The first freezing point depressant to be tried — although involun
tarily—was water. Hydrazine hydrate, which is 36 percent water, has
a freezing point of—51.7°, and a mixture containing 42 percent water
freezes at —54°. (V. I. Semishin, in Russia, had determined part of the
hydrazine-water phase diagram in 1938, and Mohr and Audrieth, in
this country, in 1949, and Hill and Summer, in England, in 1951 com
pleted the job.) But water was an extremely bad additive for a fuel. It
contributed nothing to the energetics of the system, and the mass of
the water, just going along for the ride, seriously degraded the per
formance.
Ammonia wasn't quite as bad. F. Fredericks, in 1913 and in 1923,
had reported on the hydrazine-ammonia phase diagram, which was
also investigated by D. D. Thomas, at JPL, in 1948. Ammonia, unlike
water, was a fuel, but it is a very stable compound and its heat of com
bustion is not what might be desired. And it took something like 61
percent of ammonia in the hydrazine to reduce its freezing point to
—54°! This not only reduced the performance sharply, but decreased
the density of the fuel, and, on top of that increased its vapor pres
sure so much that it boiled at about —25° instead of at the +113.5°
boiling point of pure hydrazine. Dave Horvitz of RMI investigated
ternary mixtures of hydrazine, water, and ammonia in 1950, but
couldn't find any mixture that possessed both an acceptable freezing
point and a large fraction of hydrazine. Water and ammonia were not
the answers.
Another additive investigated by RMI (in 1947) was methanol. A
mixture containing 44 percent of the hydrazine and 56 of the alcohol
freezes at —54°, and its other physical properties are acceptable, but
it yields a performance considerably below that of the neat hydrazine.
Some years later, under circumstances which will be described, inter
est in the mixture was revived.
Don Armstrong, of Aerojet, came up with something in the summer
of 1948 that for a time looked extremely promising. He found that
the addition of 13 percent of lithium borohydride to hydrazine pro
duced a mixture whose (eutectic) freezing point was —49°. Not the
The Hunting of the Hypergol . . . 41
magic —54°, but still something. The density was reduced somewhat,
from 1.004 to about 0.93, but as the borohydride itself is such an
energetic compound there was no reason to expect any appreciable
degradation of the performance. But, alas, his triumph was illusory.
After some time had elapsed the mixture was found to be inherently
unstable, and slowly and inexorably to decompose, with a steady evo
lution of hydrogen. They gave the whole idea up around 1952, but
RMI was looking at it as late as 1958, and only around 1966 or
1967 somebody else suggested using LiBH as a freezing point de
4
pressant for hydrazine! This may indicate something beyond a pro
found and depressing ignorance of the history of one's own technol
ogy, but I'm not exactly sure what.
At about the same time T. L. Thompson, of North American, came
up with another freezing point additive, whose major drawback, al
though its thermal stability was poor, was that it scared everybody to
death. He found that 15 percent of hydrocyanic acid, HCN, would
reduce the freezing point of hydrazine to —54°. But the mere thought
of the HCN so alarmed everybody (although much more toxic com
pounds had been and would be investigated, and without any par
ticular notice being taken of it) that the mixture was never accepted.
At about this time (1949-50) the LAR missile was being developed
at NOTS, and E. D. Campbell and his associates came up with a low
freezing fuel for it —a mixture of 67 percent hydrazine and 33 am
monium thiocyanate, with a freezing point of—54°. This could be lived
with, although the performance was somewhat degraded and the va
por pressure was inconveniently high.
Early in 1951, Dave Horvitz at the Metallectro Co. (where he had
moved from RMI) investigated hydrazine-aniline mixtures, and
found that the eutectic composition, with a freezing point of —36°,
contained only 17 percent hydrazine. He then started adding methyl-
amine to the mixture, to reduce the viscosity as well as the freezing
point, and finally came up with a hydrazine-aniline-methylamine
mixture (regrettably called "HAM Juice"), which froze at —50°, but
contained only 9.1 percent of hydrazine, with 19.3 of methylamine
and 71.6 of aniline. This was investigated rather thoroughly, and was
test fired, but it wasn't the answer that people were looking for. (But
the Army, in 1953 added 5 percent of hydrazine to their aniline-fur-
furyl alcohol Corporal fuel, and three years later raised the percent
age to seven.)
One of the most thoroughly investigated additives was hydrazine
nitrate. The ammonia analogue of the mixture —ammonium nitrate
in ammonia, Diver's solution —had been around for years, so the idea
42 Ignition
was obvious enough, and apparently several people thought of it in
dependently at about the same time. Dwiggins at the Naval Ordnance
Laboratory (NOL) and my group at NARTS investigated the system
in 1951, and by the end of 1953 J. M. Corcoran and his colleagues at
NOTS had worked out the whole hydrazine-hydrazine nitrate-wa
ter system. A mixture containing 55 percent hydrazine and 45 hydra
zine nitrate froze below —40°, and the magic —54° could be attained
with one containing 54 percent hydrazine, 33 of the nitrate, and 13
water. This was not bad, but there was, as usual, a catch or two. The
mixtures were quite viscous at low temperatures, and had a tendency
to froth, which could lead to trouble if a pumped feed system were
used. And, particularly, most of the really useful mixtures, with low
percentages of water, could be detonated with alarming ease. (And
the dry hydrazine nitrate, if mistreated, could produce a very plau
sible simulation of a turret fire. The NARTS group found that out!)
But some of the mixtures could be used as monopropellants, and as
such, were studied extensively for some years, and some of them were
tried as liquid gun propellants.
The NARTS group, not content with mere nitrates, tried hydra
zine perchlorate as a depressant in 1951, and found that a mixture
containing 49 percent hydrazine, 41.5 of the perchlorate, and 8.5
water was still liquid at —54°. But it was even more likely to detonate
than were the nitrate mixtures (while attempting to investigate its
thermal stability we blew a hole in the ceiling of the laboratory), and
I discovered, nearly blowing my head off in the process, that it is not
advisable to attempt to dehydrate the hydrazinium perchlorate hemi-
hydrate (the form in which it crystallizes) to the anhydrous salt. So,
although the perchlorate mixture was more energetic than the nitrate
mixtures, its use was outside of the range of practical politics. Never
theless, Walker, at Syracuse University, tried sodium perchlorate
monohydrate a year or so later, and found that a 50-percent mixture
with hydrazine froze at approximately —46°. Somehow, he managed
to do it without killing himself.
Many other freezing point depressants were tried by various
groups, with little or no success, and it was rapidly becoming obvious
that the additive approach wasn't going to get anywhere. You either
ruined your performance or were likely to blow your head off. Some
thing new had to be added to people's thinking.
It was a Navy program that led to the breakout. At the beginning of
1951 the Rocket Branch of the Bureau of Aeronautics granted con
tracts to Metallectro and to Aerojet to synthesize certain hydrazine
derivatives, and to determine their suitability as rocket propellants.
The Hunting of the Hypergol . . . 43
The three derivatives were monomethylhydrazine, symmetrical
dimethyl hydrazine, and unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine. The hope
was that a very slight alteration to the structure —and you can hardly
alter it less than by adding a methyl group — might give it a reasonable
freezing point without changing its energetics enough to matter.
At NARTS, I had the same idea, and managing to lay my hands on
a pound of monomethylhydrazine — it cost $50.00 — 1 investigated its
mixtures with hydrazine, and before the end of the year recom
mended the eutectic, which contained 12 percent hydrazine and froze
at —61°, as the fuel to concentrate on.* The performance with HNO
3
was about 98 percent of that of straight hydrazine, the density was
not too bad (0.89) the freezing point was beautiful, the viscosity was
nothing to worry about, and storage and handling didn't seem to
involve any particular problems, although the methyl hydrazine
appeared to be a bit more sensitive to catalytic decomposition than
the parent compound.
It didn't take Metallectro and Aerojet very long to discover that
they were on to something good. Symmetrical dimethyl hydrazine
turned out to be a dog (it's freezing point was only —8.9°), but mono
methylhydrazine (to be referred to from now on as MMH) melted
at —52.4°, and unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine (UDMH) melted
at —57.2°. And Dave Horvitz at Metallectro found that the 60-40
UDMH-MMH eutectic mixture froze only at —80°, or -1120F, thus
exceeding the Navy's mystic goal. What's more, its viscosity at their
magic —1000F was only 50 centipoises, so that it could really be used at
that temperature. In the meantime, Aston and his colleagues at Penn
sylvania State College had been determining the thermodynamic prop
erties (heat of formation, heat capacity, heat of vaporization, etc.) of
the substituted hydrazines, and by 1953 just about every useful piece
of information about UDMH and MMH had been firmly nailed down.
They were both magnificent fuels —and the question that had to
be decided was which one to concentrate on. A symposium on hydra
zine and its derivatives and applications was held in February 1953,
and the question was argued at length and with heat. MMH was a
little denser than UDMH, and had a slightly higher performance.
On the other hand, UDMH was less liable to catalytic decomposition,
and had such good thermal stability that it could easily be used for
regenerative cooling. Either one could be used as a combustion addi
tive for JP-4, but UDMH was more soluble, and would tolerate a
* MHF-S, introduced by Reaction Motors a few years ago, is 86% monomethyl
hydrazine and 14% hydrazine. "And there is nothing new under the sun."
44 Ignition
larger percentage of water in the fuel without separating. Both were
hypergolic with nitric acid, the UDMH being the faster —after all, it
was not only a hydrazine, but also a tertiary amine. And they both
performed well as propellants, with performances superior to those
of the tertiary diamines or of any of the phosphorous or sulfur com
pounds or of the old aniline type or furfuryl alcohol fuels. My MMH-
hydrazine mixture was fired at NARTS early in 1954, UDMH at
WADC at about the same time, MMH a little later and the UDMH-
MMH eutectic at the same agency during 1955 —all with red fuming
nitric acid. And UDMH in JP-4 was so successful in smoothing out
combustion that the fuel decided upon for the Nike Ajax missile was
17 percent UDMH in JP-4. The substituted hydrazine program was
a resounding success. It had made all the other storable fuels com
pletely obsolete.
The final decision to concentrate on UDMH was made on eco
nomic grounds. The two competitors for the first production con
tract for the substituted hydrazines were Metallectro and the Westvaco
Chlor-Alkali division of Food Machinery and Chemical Co. (FMC).
Metallectro proposed using a modification of the classic Raschig proc
ess for hydrazine, by reacting chloroamine with mono or dimethyl
amine, according to which of the two hydrazines the customer
wanted. And in their bid they proposed a carefully worked out sliding
scale of prices, depending on the size of the order.
Westvaco took another approach. They proposed using another
synthesis in which nitrous acid reacts with dimethyl amine to form
nitrosodimethylamine, which can easily be reduced to the UDMH.
The process cannot be used for MMH, and so Westvaco ignored the
latter, and being prepared to take a loss on the initial orders (after
all, the money involved was trivial from the point of view of a com
pany the size of FMC), drastically underbid Metallectro. They got the
order, and Metallectro dropped out of the picture for good. The
first military specifications for UDMH were published in September
1955. '
But that didn't inhibit Westvaco's advertising department. Intoxi
cated with success, and military specification or no, they tried to get
away with a trade name, and called their stuff "DIMAZINE — the
Westvaco brand of UDMH" and insisted that all of their people refer
to it by that name. I pitied some of their chemists, visiting various
agencies in the rocket business, dutifully and blushingly obeying
orders, amidst the ribald hoots from their highly sophisticated audi
ences, who were as aware as they were themselves of the fact that
The Hunting of the Hypergol ... 45
Westvaco UDMH was absolutely indistinguishable from that made
by Olin Mathieson or anyone else.
Some attempts were made to improve upon UDMH. Mike Pino at
California Research had, as we have seen, worked with allyl amines,
and in 1954 he carried this a bit further, and came up with the mono
and the unsymmetrical diallyl hydrazines. These were interesting, but
no particular improvement over UDMH, and were sensitive to oxida
tion and polymerization. And the people at Dow Chemical, a little
later, produced monopropargyl hydrazine and unsymmetrical dipro-
pargyl hydrazine. Again, no improvement, and both of them were
horribly viscous at low temperatures. And McBride and his group, at
NOTS, studying the oxidation chemistry of UDMH, in 1956 came
upon tetramethyl tetrazene (CH ) N—N=N-N(CH ) . But its per
3 2 3 2
formance advantage over UDMH was trivial, and its freezing point
was quite high.
So UDMH, for several years, was the fuel to be burned with nitric
acid or N O . But, as designers have been trying to wring the last
2 4
possible second of performance out of their motors, MMH has been
growing in popularity. (It, too, has a Mil. Spec, now!) And, in applica
tions which do not require a low freezing point, hydrazine itself is
fused, either straight or mixed with one of its derivatives. The fuel of
> the Titan II ICBM doesn't have to have a low freezing point, since
\ Titan II lives in a steam-heated hole in the ground, but it does need
i the highest possible performance, and hydrazine was the first candi-
. date for the job. But, as hydrazine has an unfortunate tendency to
detonate if you try to use it as a regenerative coolant, the fuel finally
chosen was a 50-50 mixture of hydrazine and UDMH, called "Aero-
zine 50" by Aerojet who came up with it first, and "50-50" by every
body else.
Today there are a bewildering lot of hydrazine-type fuels around,
with names like MAF-3 (Mixed Amine Fuel-3) or MHF-5 (Mixed Hy
drazine Fuel-5) or Hydyne, or Aerozine-50, or Hydrazoid N, or
U-DETA or whatever. But whatever the name, the fuel is a mixture of
two or more of the following: hydrazine, MMH, UDMH, diethylene
triamine (DETA, added to increase the density), acetonitrile (added to
reduce the viscosity of mixtures containing DETA) and hydrazine
nitrate. And, for one special application (a vernier motor on Surveyor)
enough water was added to MMH to form the monohydrate, whose
cooling properties were much superior to those of the anhydrous
compound. A candidate for entry to the list is ethylene di-hydrazine
(H N C H N H ) synthesized by Dow early in 1962. By itself it wouldn't
3 2 2 4 2 3
46 Ignition
be particularly useful —its freezing point is 12.8°C —but its density is
high (1.09), and it might well be superior to DETA as a density
additive.
So now the designer has a family of high performing fuels at his
disposal —reliable, easy to handle, and available. Which mixture he
chooses —or composes for the occasion —depends upon the specific
requirements of the job at hand. And he knows that it will work. That,
at least, is progress.
4
. . . and Its Mate
The RFNA of 1945 was hated by everybody who had anything to do
with it, with a pure and abiding hatred. And with reason. In the first
place, it was fantastically corrosive. If you kept it in an aluminum drum,
apparently nothing in particular happened —as long as the weather
was warm. But when it cooled down, a slimy, gelatinous, white pre
cipitate would appear and settle slowly to the bottom of the drum.
This sludge was just sticky enough to plug up the injector of the motor
when you tried to fire it. People surmised that it was some sort of a
solvated aluminum nitrate, but the aversion with which it was regarded
was equaled only by the difficulty of analyzing it.
If you tried to keep the acid in stainless steel (SS-347 stood up the
best) the results were even worse. Corrosion was faster than with
aluminum, and the acid turned a ghastly green color and its perform
ance was seriously degraded. This became understandable when the
magnitude of the change in composition was discovered. Near the
end of 1947, JPL published the results of two acid analyses. One was
of a sample of RFNA fresh from the manufacturer, which had scarcely
started to chew on the drum in which it was shipped. The other was a
sample of "old" acid, which had been standing for several months in
a SS-347 drum. The results were eloquent And, if my own experi
ence is any criterion, there was a bit of insoluble matter of cryptic
composition on the bottom of the drum. Acid like that might have
been useful in the manufacture of fertilizer, but as a propellant it was
not.*
* Note to the sophisticated reader: Don't take the exact percentages too seriously.
Acid analysis wasn't really that good in 1947. Also, most of the iron really shows up in
the ferrous and not in the ferric state, as I discovered in my own laboratory (and to ray
complete surprise) some years later.
48 Ignition
Constituent New acid Old acid
HNO 92.6 percent 73.6 percent
3
N O 6.3 percent 11.77 percent
2 4
Fe(NOg) .19 percent 8.77 percent
3
Cr(N0 ) .05 percent 2.31 percent
3 3
Ni(N0 ) -02 percent .71 percent
3 2
H O .83 percent 2.83 percent
2
So the acid couldn't be kept indefinitely in a missile tank — or there
wouldn't be any tank left. It had to be loaded just before firing, which
meant handling it in the field.
This is emphatically not fun. RFNA attacks skin and flesh with the
avidity of a school of piranhas. (One drop of it on my arm gave me a
scar which I still bear more than fifteen years later.) And when it is
poured, it gives off dense clouds of NO , which is a remarkably toxic
2
gas. A man gets a good breath of it, and coughs a few minutes, and
then insists that he's all right. And the next day, walking about, he's
just as likely as not to drop dead.
So the propellant handlers had to wear protective suits (which are
infernally hot and so awkward that they probably cause more ac
cidents than they prevent) and face shields, and frequently gas masks
or self-contained breathing apparatus.
An alternative to RFNA was mixed acid, essentially WFNA to which
had been added some 10 to 17 percent of H SO . Its performance was
2 4
somewhat lower than that of RFNA (all that stable sulfuric acid and
that heavy sulfur atom didn't help any) but its density was a little
better than that of the other acid, and it was magnificently hypergolic
with many fuels. (I used to take advantage of this property when
somebody came into my lab looking for a job. At an inconspicuous
signal, one of my henchmen would drop the finger of an old rubber
glove into a flask containing about 100 cc of mixed acid —and then
stand back. The rubber would swell and squirm" a moment, and then a
magnificent rocket-like jet of flame would rise from the flask, with
appropriate hissing noises. I could usually tell from the candidate's
demeanor whether he had the sort of nervous system desirable in a
propellant chemist.) Mixed acid, of course, didn't give off those NO
2
fumes, and everybody was convinced, as late as 1949, that it didn't
corrode stainless steel. In that year the Navy purchased several
hundred 55-gallon drums and several tank cars, all expensively (the
drums cost about $120 each) made from SS-347, and designed to
contain mixed acid.
. . . and Its Mate 49
Well, everybody had been wrong. The acid doesn't corrode stain
less—at first. But after an induction period, which may vary from
minutes to months, and which depends upon the acid composition
and particularly the percentage of water, the temperature, the past
history of the steel, and presumably upon the state of the moon, the
corrosion starts and proceeds apace. The eventual results are worse
than with RFNA. Not only is the quality of the acid degraded and the
drum damaged, but a thick, heavy, greenish-gray sludge of loathsome
appearance, revolting properties, and mysterious composition forms
and deposits. I have seen drums of mixed acid with twelve solid inches
of sludge on the bottom. To make things worse, pressure gradually
builds up in the drum or tank car, which has to be vented periodically.
And the water breathed in then (mixed acid is extremely hygroscopic)
accelerates the corrosion. Within two years all the Navy's expensive
tank cars and drums had to be junked.
Another possibility was white fuming nitric acid, which, at least,
didn't give off lethal clouds of NO when it was poured. But its freez
2
ing point was too high to be acceptable. (Pure HNO freezes at—41.6°,
3
the commercial WFNA a few degrees lower.) It was just as corrosive
as RFNA, if not more so, and was less hypergolic with many fuels
than the red acid. And it had another trick up its sleeve. For years
people had noted that a standing drum of acid slowly built up pres
sure, and had to be vented periodically. But they assumed that this
pressure was a by-product of drum corrosion, and didn't think much
about it. But then, around the beginning of 1950, they began to get
suspicious. They put WFNA in glass containers and in the dark (to
prevent any photochemical reaction from complicating the results)
and found, to their dismay, that the pressure buildup was even faster
than in an aluminum drum. Nitric acid, or WFNA at least, was in
herently unstable, and would decompose spontaneously, all by itself.
This was a revolting situation.
The fourth possibility was N O . True, it was poisonous, but if
2 4
you could avoid handling it in the field that didn't much matter. And,
as long as you kept water out of it, it was practically noncorrosive to
most metals. You didn't even have to keep it in aluminum or stainless
— ordinary mild steel would do. So the tanks of a missile could be
filled at the factory, and the operators would never see, or smell, or
breathe, the N O . And it was perfectly stable in storage, and didn't
2 4
build up any pressure. But its freezing point was —9.3°, which the
services would not accept.
Thus, with four oxidizers available, we had four sets of headaches —
and nothing that we could use with any degree of satisfaction. The
50 Ignition
situation led to what might be called "the battle of the acid," which
went on for some five years, and involved just about every chemist in
the rocket business —and a lot who were not.
There were certainly problems enough for everybody, more than
enough to go around. As a result, research went off in a dozen differ
ent, and at times contradictory, directions. Several groups attacked
the freezing point of WFNA directly, using all sorts of additives to
bring it down to a reasonable (or, in the case of those shooting for
—100CF, an unreasonable) figure. R. W. Greenwood at Bell Aircraft,
and R. O. Miller, of the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory of NACA,
both investigated ammonium nitrate and a 50 percent aqueous solu
tion of the salt; 72 percent perchloric acid (the anhydrous stuff was
entirely too touchy to handle) and a 50 percent solution of potassium
nitrate (the dry salt was almost insoluble in WFNA), which had been
suggested by WADC. They got their freezing points down where they
wanted them, but at an intolerable cost. Ignition in a motor was slow
and frequently explosive, and combustion was rough and unsatisfac
tory. And the KNO solution had another disadvantage, which had not
3
been anticipated. When it was fired, the exhaust stream contained a
high concentration of potassium ions and free electrons —a plasma,
in fact—which would absorb radio waves like mad and make radar
guidance of a missile quite impossible. Greenwood tried a few organic
additives, acetic anhydride and 2,4,6 trinitrophenol among them, but
that approach was a blind alley. Nitric acid does react with acetic
anhydride in time —and as for the trinitrophenol, loading a propel-
lant up with a high explosive isn't a very appealing idea.
W. H. Schechter, of the Callery Chemical Co., with more courage
than judgment, investigated anhydrous perchloric acid, but found
that he couldn't get the depression he wanted with a percentage of the
additive that could be lived with, and also tried nitronium perchlorate.
He didn't get any freezing point depression to speak of, the stability
of the mixture was worse than that of the straight WFNA, and its
corrosivity was aboslutely ferocious. One oth«r additive that he tried
was nitromethane, as did A. Zletz, of the Standard Oil Company of
Indiana, who also investigated the ethyl and 2 propyl homologues.
Nitromethane, naturally, was the best depressant of the lot, and a
freezing point of —1000F was reached without any trouble, but the
mixture was too sensitive and likely to explode to be of any use.
Mike Pino, of California Research, tried sodium nitrite (it worked,
but slowly reacted with the acid to form sodium nitrate, which pre
cipitated out) and sodium cobaltinitrite and found that 4 percent of
the salt plus 1 percent of water reduced the freezing point of anhydrous
acid to -650F but he couldn't get to the magic -IQO0F with any
1
. . . and Its Mate 51
reasonable amount of water. He was always very conscious of the
effect (pernicious) of water on ignition delay, and shied away from any
system that contained any great amount of it. The mixture was un
stable, too. So he took another tack, and went to work to see if he
could do anything with mixed acid. He had already tried nitrosyl
sulfuric acid, NOHSO , and had found that it was a better freezing
4
point depressant than sulfuric acid, but that it was even worse as a
sludge producer. He turned then to the alkane sulfonic acids, partic
ularly methane sulfonic acid, and found that 16 percent of this in
WFNA gave a mixture that froze only at —59°, although upon oc
casion it could be supercooled considerably below that before solidify
ing. This looked promising. It gave good ignition with the fuels he
was considering at the time (mixtures of allyl amines and triethyla-
mine). Its corrosivity was similar to or a little less than that of WFNA
or of ordinary mixed acid, but it had one shining virtue —it didn't
produce any sludge. A similar mixed acid was investigated at North
American Aviation at about the same time (1953). This used fluoro-
sulfonic acid instead of the methanesulfonic, and most of its prop
erties were very similar to those of the other mixture. But by this
time nobody cared.
Many people were more interested in the ignition delay of WFNA
than in its freezing point, and they tried to get the driest acid that
could be got, in order to determine, exactly, the effect of water on the
delay. The General Chemical division of Allied Chemical and Dye
Co. could, and would, oblige. Apparently one of their acid stills was
unusually efficient, and would turn out acid with less than 1 percent
water in it. You could get it, on special order, shipped in 14-gallon
glass carboys inside a protective aluminum drum. When it arrived,
it. was advisable to keep the carboy in a cold box —the colder the better
— to slow down the decomposition of the acid.
The work with this "anhydrous" acid extinguished any remaining
doubt that ignition delay with WFNA was critically and overwhelm
ingly dependent on its water content. Nothing else really mattered.
It had become painfully obvious that you had to know how much
water you had in your acid before you could load it into a missile and
push the button without disaster. It was equally obvious that setting
up an analytical chemistry laboratory in the field wasn't practical
politics. So a great cry went out for a "field method" for analyzing
nitric acid. What the customer wanted, of course, was a little black
I)OK into which he could insert a sample of the acid in question (or
preferably, that he could merely point at the sample!) whereupon the
box would flash a green light if the acid could be used, or a red one
if it couldn't,
52 Ignition
Little black boxes like that aren't too easy to come by. But two peo
ple tried to invent such a gadget.
The first was Dr. L. White, of the Southern Research Institute,
working for the Air Force. His idea was simple and direct. Water,
dissolved in nitric acid, has an absorption line in the near infrared.
You merely shine IR of the correct wave length through your sample,
measure the absorbtion, and there you are. (Another IR absorption
band could be used to measure the N O content.) Neat, simple —
2 4
any rocket mechanic can do it.
But things didn't turn out that way. There were the expected diffi
culties (only they were worse than expected) that stemmed from the
corrosive nature of the acid and its fumes, both of which did their
best to chew up the black box. But then something much more dis
concerting showed up. White would take a sample of acid which was,
as far as he could tell, absolutely anhydrous, with no water in it at all.
And the IR absorption band was still there, as large as life, and twice
as natural. Nitric acid appeared to be a somewhat more complicated
substance than most people thought.
It is. Take 100 percent nitric acid—pure hydrogen nitrate. (I won't
go into the question of how you go about getting such a substance.)
Does it appear as HNO , period? It does nothing of the sort. Studies
3
by Ingold and Hughes, by Dunning, and by others during the 30's
and 40's had shown that there is an equilibrium:
2HNO ^ NO^ + NO : + H O,
3 3 2
so that there is some —not much, but some —"species" water present
even in absolutely "anhydrous" acid. So the relation between "analyt
ical" water, which was what people were interested in, and optical
absorption is not linear, and you have to analyze dozens of samples of
acid in order to establish a calibration curve. White embarked upon
the calibration.
At NARTS, working for the Navy, I was the other black-box
builder. I based my method on the electrical Conductivity of the acid.
If you take pure water and start adding nitric acid to it, queer things
happen. The conductivity increases at first, from the practically
zero conductivity of pure water, to react a broad maximum at about
33 percent acid. Then it declines, reaching a minimum at about 97.5
percent acid, and then starts to rise again and is still increasing when
you get to 100 percent HNO . To make the whole thing more com
3
plicated, the presence of N O in the acid changes the conductivity,
2 4
too, since N O is partially ionized to NO+ and NO ".
2 4 3
After blundering about a bit, in the spring of 1951 I took the
. . . and Its Mate 53
following approach: I would divide a specimen of acid into three
parts. Part 1 was left alone. To part 2 I added a small amount of water,
2.5 cc to 50 cc of acid. Part 3 was diluted more liberally, 30 cc of water
to 10 of acid. I then measured the conductivities of all three parts
and derived two ratios: conductance 1: conductance 2, and conduct
ance 2: conductance 3. (Taking these ratios eliminated the conduc
tivity cell-constant and reduced the effect of temperature variations.)
The water and N O content of the acid could then, in principle, be
2 4
deduced from the two ratios. After, of course, the method had been
calibrated, by measuring the conductivities of 150 or so samples of
acid of varying but known composition.
And how do you get to know the composition of an acid? By
analyzing it, of course. Everybody knows that. So it was something of a
shock to the black-box builders to learn that nobody could analyze
nitric acid accurately enough to calibrate the field methods.
Obviously, a calibration method has to be better than the method
calibrated — and nobody could determine the water content of nitric
acit—routinely— to a tenth of a percent. The N O was easy— titration
2 4
with eerie sulfate was fast and accurate. But there was no direct
method for determining the water. You had to determine the total
acid (HNO plus N O ) and then determine the N O , and then get
3 2 4 2 4
the water by difference —a small difference between two large quan
tities.
Suppose that your analysis said that you had 0.76 percent N O , and
2 4
99.2 percent, plus or minus 0.2 percent, nitric acid (and it was a good
man who could be sure of the acid to 0.2 percent!), then what was
your water content? 0.04 percent? Minus 0.16 percent? 0.24 percent?
You could take your choice —one guess was as good as another.
Many attempts, all unsuccessful, were made to find a direct method
lor water, but I chose to apply brute force, and set out grimly to refine
I he classical method until it could be used to calibrate the field
methods. Every conceivable source of error was investigated — and it
was surprising to learn in how many ways a classical acid-base titration
can go wrong. Nobody would have believed, until he learned the hard
way, that when you make up five gallons of 1.4 normal NaOH, you
have to stir the solution for an hour to make sure that its concentra
tion is uniform to within one part in 10,000 throughout the whole
volume. Nor that when air is admitted to the stock bottle it has to be
bubbled through a trap of the same solution. If it isn't, the moisture
in the laboratory air will dilute the upper layer of the NaOH and foul
you up. Nor that when you get to a phenolphthalein end-point with
your 1.4 N alkali, it's advisable to back-titrate with 0.1 N HCl (thus
54 Ignition
splitting the last drop) until the pink color is the faintest discernible
tint. But all those precautions and refinements are necessary if you
need results that you can believe.
The most important refinement was the use of specially made pre
cision burettes, thermostated and held at 25°. (The coefficient of
expansion of 1.4 N NaOH was not well known, and even if it were,
somebody would be sure to put it in backwards!) The burettes were
made for me by the Emil Greiner Co., and cost the taxpayer seventy-
five dollars a throw. They worked so well that certain other agencies
acquired the deplorable habit of borrowing one from me and then
forgetting to return it.*
The job took almost a year, but when it was done the water in the
acid could be determined, by difference, to 0.025 percent. And the
analysis took no longer than the crude analysis of a year before.
The calibration then went like a breeze, complicated only by the
difficulties encountered when absolutely anhydrous acid was needed.
The classical way of making such a substance was to mix P O with
2 5
WFNA, and then distill the dry acid over under vacuum. This was an
infernal nuisance — three hours work might get you ten cc of anhy
drous acid —and in our case we needed it by the liter. So we hit on a
simple method that required no effort or attention whatsoever. Into
a big flask we would load about two liters of 100 percent sulfuric acid,
and then three times as much WFNA. Then, holding the flask at
about 40°, we worjld blow dry air through it, and try to condense as
much acid as we could out of the exhaust stream. We'd start the
gadget going in the evening, and by next morning there would be a
liter or two of water-white acid (the N O had all been blown out)
2 4
waiting to be stored in the deep freeze. It would analyze from 99.8
percent to more than 100 percent acid —the last, of course, containing
excess N O . The method was horribly inefficient —we lost two-thirds
2 5
of the acid in the exhaust —but with acid at nine cents a pound, who
cared?
White published his complete optical method for water and N O
2 4
at the end of 1951, and I published my conductivity method nine
months later, t Both black boxes worked fine. And, then, naturally,
everybody lost interest in WFNA.
* I name no names, but God will punish Doc Harris of WADC!
f Dave Mason and his associates at JPL, about sixteen months later, in January
1954, described another conductimetric method, which would work with both WFNA
and RFNA. Two conductivity measurements were made, both at 0°C—one of the
straight acid and one of the acid saturated with KNO. From these two measurements
3
the NO and HO could be derived using a calibration chart.
8 4 a
. . . and Its Mate 55
There were a few other analytical problems connected with nitric
acid that were cleaned up at about this time. Dr. Harris, at WADC,
designed an ingenious glass and Teflon sample holder for RFNA,
which made it possible to prevent any loss of N O when the acid was
2 4
diluted before titration, and let it be analyzed with an accuracy equal
to that possible with WFNA. And I devised analyses for mixed acid
and for Mike Pino's mixture of WFNA and methane sulfonic acid.
These are worth recording, if only to show the weird expedients to
which we were driven to get the results we needed. In both cases, the
N O and the total acid were determined exactly as in the refined
2 4
WFNA analysis, and the problem was to determine the additive acid.
In the case of the mixed acid, the major part of the nitric acid in the
sample was destroyed with formaldehyde, and any formic acid
formed was reacted with methanol and boiled off as methyl formate.
(The emerging fumes invariably caught fire and burned with a
spectacular blue flame.) What was left, then, was dumped into a
boiling mixture of water and n-propanol, and titrated, conducti-
metrically, with barium acetate. This sounds like a weird procedure,
but it worked beautifully, and gave as precise results as anybody could
wish. Mike Pino's mixture had to be treated differently. The nitric
acid was destroyed by reacting it with warm formic acid, and what was
left was titrated, potentiometrically, with sodium acetate in acetic
acid, in a medium of glacial acetic acid. One electrode was a conven
tional glass electrode as used for pH determination, the other a
modified calomel electrode, using saturated lithium chloride in acetic
acid. Again, a peculiar but effective analysis. And as soon as these
methods had been worked out, everybody stopped using either
mixed acid!
In many ways N O was more appealing as an oxidizer than nitric
2 4
acid. Its performance was a little better, and it didn't have so many
corrosion problems. Its main drawback, of course, was its freezing
point, and several agencies tried to do something about that. The
prime candidate for a freezing point depressant was nitric oxide,
NO. Wittorf, as early as 1905, had examined the phase behavior of
I lie mixture, as had Baume and Roberts in 1919. But mixtures of
NO and N O have a higher vapor pressure than the neat nitrogen
2 4
Ictroxide, and several optmists tried to find an additive that would
reduce the freezing point without increasing the vapor pressure. This
turned out to be rather easy to do —lots of things are soluble in N O
2 4
— but at an unacceptable price. L. G. Cole, at JPL, in 1948, tried such
tilings as mono and di nitrobenzene, picric acid, and methyl nitrate,
and discovered, upon examining his mixtures, that he had some
56 Ignition
extremely touchy and temperamental high explosives on his hands.
T. L. Thompson, at North American, three years later, tried nitro-
methane, nitroethane, and nitropropane, and made the same dis
covery. Collins, Lewis, and Schechter, at Callery Chemical Co., tried
these same nitro-alkanes in 1953, as well as tetranitromethane, and
worked out the ternary phase diagram for nitrogen tetroxide, nitro-
methane, and TNM. Again —high explosives. At about the same time,
S. Burket, at Aerojet, went them one better by trying not only these
compounds, but even the notoriously treacherous nitroform, plus
diethyl carbonate, diethyl oxalate, and diethyl cellosolve. And his
mixtures, too, were nothing more than catastrophes looking for a
place to happen. It appeared that about the only thing that could
safely be dissolved in a nitrogen oxide was another nitrogen oxide.
T. L. Thompson had tried nitrous oxide in 1951, and reported that
it wasn't particularly soluble in N O , and this was confirmed by
2 4
W. W. Rocker of du Pont. So nitric oxide it had to be.*
NO is an extremely effective freezing point depressant for N O .
2 4
It combines, under pressure or at low temperatures, with the latter
to form the unstable N O , so that the eutectic appears between pure
2 3
N O and the composition corresponding to N O , so that a small
2 4 2 3
addition of NO has an inordinately large effect on the freezing point.
G. R. Makepeace and his associates, at NOTS, were able to show, in
1948, that 25 percent of NO would bring the freezing point of nitro
gen tetroxide down below the required -650F, and that 30 percent
would depress it well below the magic — 10O0F. However, the vapor
pressure of the latter mixture at 1600F was unacceptably high, about
300 psi. Several investigators examined the system, among them T. L.
Thompson of North American and T. J. McGonnigle of, appropri
ately, the Nitrogen Division of Allied Chemical and Dye Co., but the
definitive work came from JPL and NOTS.
Between 1950 and 1954, Whittaker, Sprague, and Skolnik and their
group at NOTS, and B. H. Sage and his colleagues at JPL investi
gated the nitrogen tetroxide-nitric oxide system with a thorough
ness that left nothing to be discovered that could conceivably be worth
the trouble of discovering. Their meticulous investigations were to
bear fruit years later, when Titan II, with its N O oxidizer, was
2 4
developed.
Several agencies tried the mixed oxides of nitrogen (MON-25 or
* Cole, at JPL, had reported in 1948 that a mixture of 41.5 percent NO and the
2
remainder NO had a freezing point of—51° and a boiling point of 33°. These figures
2 4
so thoroughly contradicted the experience of everybody else that they are completely
inexplicable.
. . . and Its Mate 57
MON-30 or whatever, with the number designating the percentage
of NO in the mix) with various fuels, and discovered that it was more
difficult to get a good performance (a high percentage of the theoreti
cal performance) with MON than with neat nitrogen tetroxide. Ap
parently the great kinetic stability of the NO slowed down the com
bustion reaction. For this reason, and because of its high vapor pres
sure, investigators turned away from MON for some years. (Certain
space rockets, today, use MON-IO.)*
And there was another reason. RFNA had been domesticated. Two
things had done it: A series of meticulous studies at Ohio State Uni
versity and at JPL solved the problem of decomposition and pres
sure buildup, and a completely unexpected breakthrough at NARTS
reduced the corrosion problem to negligible proportions. With these
problems solved the acid could be "packaged" or loaded into a missile
at the factory, so that it didn't have to be handled in the field. And that
solved the problem of those toxic fumes, and eliminated the danger
of acid burns.
By the beginning of 1951 the nature and behavior of nitric acid
had become comprehensible. True, it was a fiendishly complicated
system —one could hardly call it a substance —but some sense could be
made out of it. The monumental work of Professor C. K. Ingold and
his colleagues, published in a series of articles in 1950, had clarified
the equilibria existing among the various species present in the sys
tem, and Frank and Schirmer, in Germany, in the same year, ex
plained its decomposition. Briefly, this is what their work showed:
First, in very strong nitric acid, there is an equilibrium:
(1) 2HNO *± H NOJ + NO3.
3 2
However the concentration of H NO is extremely small at any time,
2 3
since it, too is in equilibrium:
(2) H NO + ?± H O + NO +,
2 3 2 2
so that for all practical purposes we can write:
(3) 2HNO 3* NO+ + NO - + H O
3 3 2
and ignore the H NO ". In dilute acid, the equilibrium is
2 3
(4) H O + HNO <± H O+ + NO ".
2 3 3 3
Thus, in acid containing less than about 2.5 percent of water, NOt.
* And "green" NO, containing about 0.6% of NO and green by transmitted light,
2 4
has recently been developed. The NO seems to reduce stress corrosion of titanium, and
•ilso scavenges dissolved oxygen in the NO.
8 4
58 Ignition
is the major cation, and in acid containing more than that, H O+
3
takes that role. Exactly at 2.5 percent water, very little of either one
is present, which very neatly explains the minimum in the electrical
conductivity observed there. If NO is the active oxidizing ion in
2
strong acid (and in the course of some corrosion studies I made a
couple of years later I proved that it is) the effect of water on ignition
delay is obvious. Equation (3) shows that adding water to dry acid
will reduce the concentration of NO which is the active species. The
2
addition of NO " will do the same thing —which explains the poor
3
combustion observed with acid containing NH NO .
4 3
The nitronium (NO+) ion would naturally be attracted to a negative
site on a fuel molecule, such as the concentration of electrons at a
double or triple bond —which goes far to justify Lou Rapp's remarks
as to the desirability of multiple bonds to shorten ignition delay.
The NO+ ion also explains the instability of nitrites in strong acid
by the reaction:
NO " + NO+ -* N O
2 2 4
If N O is present in strong acid, another set of equilibria show up.
2 4
(5) 2NO ?± N O ?± NO+ + NO -
2 2 4 3
The result of all of this is that (even neglecting solvation) in strong
acid containing N O have appreciable quantities of at least seven
2 4
species:
HNO NO +
3 2
N O NO+
2 4
NO and
2
H O NO -
2 3
Plus possible traces of H O+ and H NO+. And all of them in inter
3 2
locking equilibria. But this didn't explain the pressure buildup. Nitric
acid decomposes by the gross reaction.
(6) 4HNO -> 2N O + 2H O + O
3 2 4 2 2
But how? Well, Frank and Schirmer had shown that there is yet
another equilibrium present in the system, and another species:
(7) NO + NO + ?± N O
3 2 2 5
And N O was well known to be unstable and to decompose by the
2 5
reaction.
(8) N O -• N O + VzO
2 8 2 4 2
. . . and Its Mate 59
Then as O is essentially insoluble in nitric acid, it bubbles out of it
2
and the pressure builds up and your acid turns red from the NO .
2
What to do about it? There were two possible approaches. The
obvious one is suggested by equation (6): increase the concentration
(or, in the case of the oxygen, the pressure) of the species on the
right hand side of the equation, and force the equilibrium back. It
soon became obvious that merely putting a blanket of oxygen over
your WFNA wouldn't help. The equilibrium oxygen pressure was
much too high. I have actually seen the hair-raising sight of rocket
mechanics trying to determine the oxygen pressure developed over
decomposing WFNA by measuring the bulging of the drums —and
shuddered at the sight! The equilibrium oxygen pressure over 100
percent acid at zero ullage (no appreciable unfilled volume in the
tank) at 1600F turned out to be well over 70 atmospheres. Nobody
wants to work with a bomb like that.
To reduce the equilibrium oxygen pressure, you obviously have to
increase the N O or the water concentration or both. WFNA and
2 4
anhydrous acid were definitely out.
It was D. M. Mason and his crew at JPL and Kay and his group at
Ohio State who undertook —and completed — the heroic task of
mapping the phase behavior and equilibrium pressure and composi
tion of the nitric acid-N 0 -H 0 system over the whole composition
2 4 2
range of interest, up to 50% N O and up to 10 percent or so H O-
2 4 2
and from room temperature up to 120°C. By the time these groups
were finished (all of the work was published by 1955) there was
nothing worth knowing about nitric acid that hadn't been nailed
down. Thermodynamics, decomposition, ionetics, phase properties,
transport properties, the works. Considering the difficulties involved
in working with such a miserable substance, the achievement can
fairly be classified as heroic.
And it paid off. An RFNA could be concocted which had a quite
tolerable decomposition pressure (considerably less than 100 psi)
even at 16O0F (710C). The General Chemical Co. came up with one
containing 23% N O and 2% H O, while the JPL mixture, which
2 4 2
they called SFNA (Stable Fuming Nitric Acid) contained 14 percent
and 2.5 percent respectively.
The freezing points of the HNO -N O -H^O mixtures were soon
3 2 4
mapped out over the whole range of interest. R. O. Miller at LFPL,
G. W. ElverUm at JPL, and Jack Gordon at WADC among others,
were involved in this job, which was completed by 1955.
Their results were not in the best of agreement (the mixtures fre
quently supercooled and, as I have mentioned, RFNA is not the
60 Ignition
easiest thing in the world to analyze) but they all showed that both the
General Chemical Co. mixture and JPL's SFNA froze below -650F.
About this time the Navy decided to relax and enjoy it and backed
off from their demand for the mystic — 1000F and everybody and his
brother heaved a deep sigh of relief. One job done!
The solution to the corrosion problem turned out to be simple —
once we had thought of it. In the spring of 1951 we at NARTS were
concerned about —and studying —the corrosion of 18-8 stainless steel,
specifically SS-347, by WFNA. Eric Rau, who had been with me for
only a few months (the chemistry lab had been functioning only since
the previous summer) thought that a coating of fluoride on the steel
might protect it from the acid. (Don't ask me why he thought so!)
So, he talked a friend of his who worked at the General Chemical
Co. division of Allied Chemical and Dye into taking some of our
sample strips of 347 and leaving them for some days inside one of
the pipelines that conveyed HF from one part of the plant to another.
Then Eric tested these samples for corrosion resistance, and found
that they corroded just as badly as did the untreated steel. But, this
corrosion was delayed, and didn't start, apparently, until a day or two
had passed. The inference was that (1) a fluoride coating was protec
tive, but (2) it didn't last long in WFNA. He thought then that it might
be possible to make the fluoride coating self-healing by putting some
HF in the WFNA. However the only HF that we had in the lab was
the common 50 percent aqueous solution of that acid, and Eric didn't
want to add any water to his WFNA. So I suggested that he try am
monium bifluoride, NH F-HF, which is more than two-thirds HF
4
anyway, and a lot easier to handle. Also, we had it on the shelf. He
tried it, and to our incredulous delight it worked —worked with an
effectiveness beyond our wildest hopes. A few weeks of messing
around showed us that 0.5 percent of HF in the acid, no matter how
introduced, reduced the corrosion rate of the steel by a factor of ten
or more, and that more than 0.5 percent didn't improve things
measurably. We reported this finding in our quarterly report, on 1
July, 1951, but NARTS was just two years old then, and apparently
nobody bothered to read our reports.
But there was a meeting at the Pentagon devoted to the problems
of nitric acid on October 10-11-12, attended by about 150 propellant-
oriented people from industry, government and the services. I went,
and so did Dr. Milton Scheer ("Uncle Milty") of our group, and on
the afternoon of the 11th he reported Eric's discovery. What made
the occasion delightful (for us) was the fact that that very morning, in
discussing another paper, R. W. Greenwood, of Bell Aircraft, had
stated thai he had tried ammonium bifluoride as a freezing point
. . . and Its Mate 61
depressant for WFNA, and then, three papers later, T. L. Thompson
of North American Aviation reported on using both anhydrous and
aqueous HF as freezing point depressants for R.F.N.A. And both of
them had completely missed the corrosion-inhibiting effect!
Then everybody got into the act — North American, JPL, and just
about everybody else. (We were already there.) As it turned out, HF
was even more effective in inhibiting the corrosion of aluminum than
reducing that of SS-347: inhibition was just as good with RFNA as
with WFNA; and it was effective not only in the liquid phase but in
the gas phase, where the metal was in the acid vapor above the liquid
level.
But while HF was a good inhibitor for aluminum and for 18-8
stainless steels, it wasn't universally effective. It had no particular
effect on the corrosion of nickel or chromium, while it increased the
corrosion rate at tantalum by a factor of 2000 and that of titanium by
one of 8000.
There was a great deal of interest in titanium at that time, and as
many rocket engineers wanted to use it, the question of its resistance
to RFNA couldn't be neglected. But these corrosion studies were
interrupted by a completely unexpected accident. On December 29,
1953, a technician at Edwards Air Force Base was examining a set of
titanium samples immersed in RFNA, when, absolutely without warn
ing, one or more of them detonated, smashing him up, spraying him
with acid and flying glass, and filling the room with NO . The tech
2
nician, probably fortunately for him, died of asphyxiation without
regaining consciousness.
There was a terrific brouhaha, as might be expected, and JPL
undertook to find out what had happened. J. B. Rittenhouse and his
associates tracked the facts down, and by 1956 they were fairly clear.
Initial intergranular corrosion produced a fine black powder of
(mainly) metallic titanium. And this, when wet with nitric acid, was
as sensitive as nitroglycerine or mercury fulminate. (The driving
reaction, of course, was the formation of TiO .) Not all titanium alloys
2
behaved this way, but enough did to keep the metal in the doghouse
for years, as far as the propellant people were concerned.
In spite of the titanium debacle, the rocket business now had a
usable nitric acid, and a rewriting of the military specifications for
WFNA and RFNA seemed appropriate.
During 1954, then, a group representing the services and industry
got together under Air Force sponsorship to do just that. I was there,
as one of the Navy representatives.
Various users still argued over the relative merits of 14 percent
RFNA and 22 percent RFNA, and a few still liked WFNA. The chem-
62 Ignition
ical industry was amiably willing to go along with anything —"Hell,
it's just as easy to make one sort of acid as another —just tell us what
you want!" So we decided to write one specification which would
make everybody happy. We officially threw out the terms WFNA and
RFNA and described no less than four types of nitric acid, which we
designated, with stunning unoriginally as "Nitric Acid, Type I, II,
III and IV." These contained, in the order named, nominally 0 per
cent, —7 percent, 14 percent, and 21 percent N O . If you wanted HF
2 4
inhibited acid, you asked for I-A or HI-A, or whatever, and your acid
would contain 0.6 percent HF.
I was against describing the nature of the inhibitor in the openly
published specifications, since the inhibition was such an unlikely —
though simple — trick that it might well have been kept secret for some
time. I had friends in the intelligence community, and asked them to
try to learn, discreetly, whether or not the trick was known on the
other side of the iron curtain. The answer came back, with remarkable
speed, that it was not, and that, in fact, the Soviet HF manufacture
was in trouble, and that the director of the same was vacationing in
Siberia. So I protested violently and at length, but the Air Force was
running the show and I was overruled. And when the specs were
published, the gaff was blown for good.
Included in the specs were the procedures for analyzing the acids.
These were conventional, except the one for HF, which was a compli
cated and tricky optical method involving the bleaching of a zir
conium-alizarin dye by fluoride ion. In my own lab I declined to have
anything to do with it, and whomped up a simple — not to say simple-
minded—test that required no effort or intelligence whatever. You
put one volume of acid and two of water in a polyethylene beaker, and
dropped into it a magnetic stirring rod enclosed in soft glass tubing
and weighed. You then let the thing stir overnight and reweighed the
stirring rod. If you had calibrated that particular piece of glass with
an acid containing a known concentration of HF, that was all you
needed. Accuracy quite good enough for the purpose.
Dave Mason of JPL came up with another quici-and-dirty method
for estimating the HF — almost as simple as mine, and a lot faster. It
was a colorimetric method, which depended upon the bleaching
effect of fluoride ion on purple ferric salicylate.
As it turned out, the type M-A gradually edged out the others, and
is now the nitric acid oxidizer.* The engineers call it IRFNA, inhibited
Red Fuming Nitric Acid, and very few of the current crop are even
*Just one important motor —that for the second stages of Vanguard and of Thor
Able used type I-A acid (IWFNA) which it burned with UDMH.
. . . and Its Mate 63
aware that there ever was another sort —or of what "inhibited"
means. A few years ago I saw one alleged rocket engineer fill a stain
less steel tank with RFNA without any HF in it —and then wonder why
his acid turned green.
The only other sort of acid worth mentioning is "Maximum Density
Nitric Acid." This was proposed by Aerojet for applications in which
density is all-important and freezing point requirements are not too
strict. It contains 44 percent N O and has a density of 1.63. Once a
2 4
satisfactory acid had been found, interest in its analysis dropped to
zero. M-A was so smoothly hypergolic with UDMH, and a little water
more or less didn't make any difference, and you could keep it sealed
so it wouldn't pick up water —and with the HF in it there wasn't
any corrosion to worry about —so why bother? An occasional pur
chasing agent may have a drum analyzed now and then, but the
general custom is to accept the manufacturer's analysis —slap the
acid into the tank —and fire it. And it works.
The situation today, then, is this: For tactical missiles, where the
freezing point of the propellants matters, IRFNA type IH-A is the
oxidizer. The 47,000-pound thrust Lance, whose fuel is UDMH, is an
example, as is the Bullpup, which burns a mixture of UDMH, DETA
and acetonitrile. In space, Bell's remarkably reliable Agena motor,
of 16,000 pounds thrust, also uses IRFNA, along with UDMH.
For strategic missiles, which are fired from hardened —and heated
— sites, N O , with a somewhat greater performance, is the oxidizer
2 4
used. Titan II is, of course, the largest of the US ICBMS, and its
first stage is driven by two 215,000-pound thrust motors, using N O
2 4
and the 50-50 hydrazine-UDMH mixture.
Many other N O motors are used in space, ranging from the
2 4
21,500-pound Apollo service engine, which also uses 50-50, down to
tiny one-pound thrusters used for attitude control. The fuel is in
variably a hydrazine or a hydrazine mixture. And the users have
reason to be happy with their performance and reliability.
As have the chemists, and engineers, who don't have to go through
it again.
Afterword
Another symposium on liquid propellants was held at the Pentagon
on May 23 and 24, 1955. If the October 1951 meeting was devoted
64 Ignition
mainly to difficulties, the May 1955 meeting described a series of bat
tles fought and triumphantly won.
The high points were the narration by Bernard Hornstein of ONR
of the development of MMH and UDMH, and that by S. P. Green
field, of North American, of the vicissitudes of NALAR.
NALAR was a 2.75" diameter air-to-air missile for the Air Force.
The requirements were rough. The liquid propellants had to be hy-
pergolic. They also had to be packageable, so that the missile could be
stored, fully fueled, for five years and be in a condition to fire. And
they had to perform at any temperature from -650F to +1650F. North
American started development in July 1950.
The first oxidizer they tried was RFNA, 18% N O . From the be
2 4
ginning they were contending with a pressure buildup, and with cor
rosion. However, trying to get good ignition and smooth combustion,
they fired it with:
Turpentine
and Decalin
and 2Nitropropane plus 10-20% turpentine
and Isopropanol
and Ethanol
and Butylmercaptan
and Toluene
and Alkyl thiophosphites
and got nowhere.
Then they shifted to MON-30 for their oxidizer, 70% N O , 30%
2 4
NO, and resumed their quest for smooth ignition and smooth com
bustion with:
Turpentine
and Butyl mercaptan
and Hydrazine
and Isopropanol
and Toluene
and 2Methyl furan
and Methanol
and Aviation gasoline
and Turpentine plus 20-30% 2Methyl furan
and Butyl mercaptan plus 20-30% 2Methyl
furan
and Isopropanol plus 30% turpentine
and Methanol plus 20-25% 2Methyl furan
and Methanol plus 30-40% Hydrazine
. . . and Its Mate 65
and Alkyl thiophosphites
and Turpentine plus Alkyl thiophosphites
and JP-4 plus Alkyl thiophosphites
and JP-4 plus 10-30% Xylidine
and achieved a succession of hard starts, usu
ally followed by rough combustion.
By this time the spring of 1953 had arrived, and the engineers
learned of the uses of HF in inhibiting nitric acid corrosion. (The fact
that this effect had been discovered two years before, and that North
American's own chemists had been working with HF for at least a year
suggest that there was a lack of communication somewhere, or, per
haps, that engineers don't read!)
Be that as it may, they returned, probably with a sense oideja vu, to
turpentine and RFNA-but inhibited this time. To improve ignition
they added up to 20 percent of Reference Fuel 208, the alias of 2-di-
methylamino-4-methyl-l-3-2-dioxaphospholane, to the turpentine.
Then the Air Force, who, you will recollect, was paying for all of this,
suggested that they substitute UDMH for the RF-208. They did, and
the results were so good that they went to straight UDMH, and to Hell
with the turps.
It had taken them four years to arrive at today's standard work
horse combination of UDMH-IRFNA, but they had finally arrived.
And recently, a NALAR missile which had been sitting around for
about twelve years was hauled off the shelf and fired. And it worked.
The hypergol and his mate had been captured and tamed. (Fade out
into the sunset to the sound of music.)
5
Peroxide ~
Always a Bridesmaid
Hydrogen peroxide can be called the oxidizer that never made it.
(At least, it hasn't yet.) Not that people weren't interested in it —they
were, both in this country and, even more so, in England. Its perfor
mance with most fuels was close to that of nitric acid, as was its den
sity, and in certain respects it was superior to the other oxidizer. First,
no toxic fumes, and it didn't chew on skin as the acid did. If you re
ceived a splash of it, and didn't delay too long about washing it off,
all the damage you got was a persistent itch, and skin bleached bone
white —to stay that way until replaced by new. And it didn't corrode
metals as the acid did.
But (as is usual in the propellant business, there were lots of "buts")
the freezing point of 100 percent H O was only half a degree below
2 2
that of water. (Of course, 85 or 90 percent stuff, which was the best
available in the 40's, had a better freezing point, but diluting a pro
pellant with an inert, just to improve its freezing point, is not a proc
ess that appeals to men interested in propulsion!) And it was unstable.
Hydrogen peroxide decomposes according to the equation H O —*
2 2
H O + 1ZiO , with the evolution of heat. Of course, WFNA also decom
2 2
posed, but not exothermically. The difference is crucial: It meant that
peroxide decomposition is self-accelerating. Say that you have a tank
of peroxide, with no efficient means of sucking heat out of it. Your
peroxide starts to decompose for some reason or other. This decom
position produces heat, which warms up the rest of the peroxide,
which naturally then starts to decompose faster — producing more
heat. And so the faster it goes the faster it goes until the whole thing
Peroxide—Always a Bridesmaid 67
goes up in a magnificent whoosh or bang as the case may be, spread
ing superheated steam and hot oxygen all over the landscape.
And a disconcerting number of things could start the decomposi
tion in the first place: most of the transition metals (Fe, Cu, Ag, Co,
etc.) and their compounds; many organic compounds (a splash of
peroxide on a wool suit can turn the wearer into a flaming torch,
suitable for decorating Nero's gardens); ordinary dirt, of ambiguous
composition, and universal provenance; OH ions. Name a substance
at random, and there's a 50-50 chance (or better) that it will catalyze
peroxide decomposition.
There were certain substances, stannates and phosphates, for
instance, that could be added to peroxide in trace quantities and would
stabilize it a bit by taking certain transition metal ions out of circula
tion, but their usefulness and potency was strictly limited; and they
made trouble when you wanted to decompose the stuff catalytically.
The only thing to do was to keep the peroxide in a tank made of
something that didn't catalyze its decomposition (very pure aluminum
was best) and to keep it clean. The cleanliness required was not merely
surgical —it was levitical. Merely preparing an aluminum tank to
hold peroxide was a project, a diverting ceremonial that could take
days. Scrubbing, alkaline washes, acid washes, flushing, passivation
with dilute peroxide —it went on and on. And even when it was suc
cessfully completed, the peroxide would still decompose slowly; not
enough to start a runaway chain reaction, but enough to build up an
oxygen pressure in a sealed tank, and make packaging impossible.
And it is a nerve-wracking experience to put your ear against a pro-
pellant tank and hear it go "glub" —long pause — "glub" and so on.
After such an experience many people, myself (particularly) included,
tended to look dubiously at peroxide and to pass it by on the other
side.
Well, early in 1945, we laid our hands on a lot of German peroxide,
about 80-85 percent stuff. Some of it went to England. The British
were very much interested in it as an oxidizer and in the German
manufacturing process. In that same year they fired it in a motor
using a solution of calcium permanganate to decompose the peroxide,
and with furfural as the fuel, and for several years they worked with
it and various (mainly hydrocarbon) fuels.
The rest of it came to this country. However, it contained consider
able sodium stannate (as a stabilizer) and was not too suitable for
experimental work. So the Navy made a deal with the Buffalo Electro
chemical Co., which was just getting into production itself making
high-strength peroxide. The Navy turned over most of the German
68 Ignition
peroxide to Becco, who diluted it down to 2 or 4 percent mouthwash
or hair bleach (where the stabilizer was a help) and Becco furnishing
the Navy with an equivalent amount of new 90 percent stuff without
any stabilizer. And then the Navy distributed this to the various
workers in the field.
JPL was one of the first agencies in this country to look at peroxide
seriously. From late 1944 through 1948 they worked it out, using 87
percent to 100 percent peroxide, and a variety of fuels, including
methanol, kerosene, hydrazine, and ethylene diamine. Only the hy
drazine was hypergolic with the peroxide; all the other combinations
had to be started with a pyrotechnic igniter. One very odd combina
tion that they investigated during this period was peroxide and nitro-
methane, either straight or with 35 percent nitroethane or with 30
percent methanol. One oddity was the very low O/F ratio, which ran
from 0.1 to 0.5 or so. (With hydrazine as a fuel, it would be about 2.0!
The large amount of oxygen in the fuel explains the low O/F.)
Other agencies, MIT and GE and the M. W. Kellogg Co. among
them, burned peroxide with hydrazines of various concentrations —
from 54 percent up to 100 percent, and Kellogg even tried it with
K Cu(CN) catalyst in the hydrazine, as the Germans had done.
3 4
In general, everybody got respectable performances out of perox
ide, although there were some difficulties with ignition and with com
bustion stability, but that freezing point was a tough problem, and
most organizations rather lost interest in the oxidizer.
Except the Navy. At just that time the admirals were kicking and
screaming and refusing their gold-braided lunches at the thought of
bringing nitric acid aboard their beloved carriers; they were also
digging in their heels with a determined stubbornness that they hadn't
shown since that day when it had first been suggested that steam might
be preferable to sail for moving a battleship from point A to point B.
So NOTS was constrained to develop a "nontoxic" propellant
system based on hydrogen peroxide and jet fuel, and with acceptable
low temperature behavior.
A lot of information was available —on the shelf. Maas and his
associates, during the 20's, had investigated hydrogen'peroxide up
and down and sideways, and had dissolved all sorts of things in it,
from salt to sucrose. And many of these things were excellent freezing
point depressants: 9.5 percent of ammonia, for instance, formed a
eutectic which froze at —40°, and a mixture containing 59 percent
froze at —54°. (In between, at 33 percent, was the compound NH -
4
OOH, which melted at about 25°.) And one containing 45 percent of
Peroxide—Always a Bridesmaid 69
methanol froze at —40°. These mixtures, however, had one slight
drawback — they were sensitive and violent explosives.
The British, as has been mentioned, were intensely interested in
peroxide, and Wiseman, of ERDE (Explosives Research and Develop
ment Establishment) at Waltham Abbey, pointed out in 1948 that
ammonium nitrate was a good freezing point depressant and didn't
make it into a high explosive. So the NOTS team (G. R. Makepeace
and G. M. Dyer) mapped out the relevant part of the peroxide-AN-
water field, and came up with a mixture that didn't freeze above—54°.
It was 55 percent peroxide, 25 percent ammonium nitrate and 20
percent water. They fired it successfully with JP-I early in 1951, but
the performance was not impressive. Other peroxide-AN mixtures
were fired by NOTS, and, a little later, by NARTS. In the meantime,
L. V. Wisniewski, at Becco, had been adding things like ethylene
glycol, diethylene glycol, and tetrahydrofuran to peroxide. These
mixtures were designed as monopropellants, but they froze at —40°,
and RMI tried them as oxidizers for gasoline and JP-4, with indiffer
ent success. Below +100C, RMI just couldn't get the mixtures to ig
nite. Also, they were dangerously explosive.
So, the only low-freezing peroxide mixtures which could be used
were those containing ammonium nitrate —and these had serious
limitations. One of these was that adding AN to the peroxide in
creased its instability so much that it was likely to detonate in the
injector, and was almost certain to go off, taking the motor with it, if
you tried to use it for regenerative cooling.
Ignition of a hydrogen peroxide system, particularly one burning
gasoline or jet fuel, was always a problem. In some cases, a solution
of calcium permanganate was injected along with the propellants at
the start of the run, but this was an awkward complication. In some
tests (at MIT) a small amount of catalyst (cobaltons nitrate) was dis
solved in the peroxide, but this reduced its stability. The fuel was
kerosene with a few percent of o-toluidine. A hypergolic or easily
ignited starting slug (generally hydrazine, sometimes containing a
catalyst) could lead the fuel. An energetic solid-propellant pyrotech
nic igniter was used in some cases. Probably the most reliable, and
hence the safest, technique was to decompose part or all of the per
oxide in a separate catalyst chamber, lead the hot products into the
main chamber, and inject the fuel (and the rest of the oxidizer, if
any) there. (A stack of screens made of silver wire was an efficient
catalyst array.) NARTS designed and fired a motor which incorpo
rated the catalyst chamber in the main chamber.
70 Ignition
Most of the Navy work on peroxide was not directed toward mis
siles, but toward what was called "super performance" for fighter
planes —an auxiliary rocket propulsion unit that could be brought
into play to produce a burst of very high speed — so that when a pilot
found six Migs breathing down his neck he could hit the panic button
and perform the maneuver known as getting the hell out of here.
The reason for the jet fuel was clear enough; the pilot already had it
aboard, and so only an oxidizer tank had to be added to the plane.
But here an unexpected complication showed up. The peroxide
was to be stored aboard airplane carriers in aluminum tanks. And
then suddenly it was discovered that trace quantities of chlorides in
peroxide made the latter peculiarly corrosive to aluminum. How to
keep traces of chloride out of anything when you're sitting on an ocean
of salt water was a problem whose solution was not entirely obvious.
And there was always the problem of gross pollution. Say that some
body dropped (accidentally or otherwise) a greasy wrench into 10,000
gallons of 90 percent peroxide in the hold of the ship. What would
happen —and would the ship survive? This question so worried
people that one functionary in the Rocket Branch (safely in Wash
ington) who had apparently been reading Captain Horatio Horn-
blower, wanted us at NARTS to build ourselves a 10,000-gallon tank,
fill it up with 90 percent peroxide, and then drop into it —so help me
God —one rat. (He didn't specify the sex of the rat.) It was with con
siderable difficulty that our chief managed to get him to scale his order
down to one test tube of peroxide and one quarter inch of rat tail.
Carrier admirals are —with good reason — deadly afraid of fire.
That was one of the things they had against acid and a hypergolic
fuel.
A broken missile on deck —or any sort of shipboard accident that
brought fuel and acid together —would inevitably start a fire. On the
other hand, they reasoned that jet fuel wouldn't even mix with per
oxide, but would just float on top of it, doing nothing. And if, some
how, it caught fire, it might be possible to put it out —with foam per
haps—without too much trouble.
So, at NARTS we tried it. A few drums of peroxide (about 55
gallons per drum) were poured out into a big pan, a drum or two of
JP-4 was floated on top, and the whole thing touched off. The results
were unspectacular. The JP burned quietly, with occasional patches
of flare or fizz burning. And the fire chief moved in with his men and
his foam and put the whole thing out without any fuss. End of
exercise.
Peroxide—Always a Bridesmaid 71
The Lord had his hands on our heads that day —the firemen, a
couple of dozen bystanders, and me.
For when we —and other people —tried it again (fortunately on a
smaller scale) the results were different. The jet fuel burns quietly
at first, then the flare burning starts coming, and its frequency in
creases. (That's the time to start running.) Then, as the layer of JP
gets thinner, the peroxide underneath gets warmer, and starts to
boil and decompose, and the overlying fuel is permeated with oxygen
and peroxide vapor. And then the whole shebang detonates, with
absolutely shattering violence.
When the big brass saw a demonstration or two, the reaction was
"Not on my carrier!" and that was that.
The Super-P project was dropped for a variety of reasons, but the
pan-burning tests were not entirely without influence on the final
decision.
It is amusing to note that when actual tests were made of the effects
of a big spill of acid and UDMH, the results weren't so frightening
after all. There was a big flare, but the two propellants were so reac
tive that the bulk liquids could never really mix and explode, but were,
rather, driven apart. So the flare was soon over, and plain water— and
not much of it, considering —was enough to bring things under con
trol. And so acid-UDMH propelled missiles finally got into the car
riers' magazines after all.
But peroxide didn't. Research on it continued for some years, and
the British designed and built a rocket-driven plane and a missile or
two around the peroxide-JP combination, but that was about all,
and for some ten years peroxide, as an oxidizer, has been pretty
much out of the picture. (Monopropellant peroxide is another story.)
Higher concentrations (you can buy 98 percent stuff now) have ap
peared in the last few years, and they appear to be rather more stable
than the 90 percent material, but all the drum beating indulged in
by the manufacturers hasn't got the bridesmaid into a bridal bed.
Peroxide just didn't make it.
6
Halogens and
Politics and Deep Space
While all of this was going on there were a lot of people who were not
convinced that peroxide, or acid, or nitrogen tetroxide was the last
word in storable oxidizers, nor that something a bit more potent
couldn't be found. An oxygen-based oxidizer is all very well, but it
seemed likely that one containing fluorine would pack an impressive
wallop. And so everybody started looking around for an easily de
composed fluorine compound that could be used as a storable oxi
dizer.
"Easily decomposed" is the operative phrase. Most fluorine com
pounds are pretty final — so final that they can be thought of as the
ash of an element which has been burned with fluorine, and are quite
useless as propellants. Only when fluorine is combined with nitrogen,
or oxygen, or another halogen, can it be considered as available to
burn something else. And in 1945 not very many compounds of fluo
rine with these elements were known.
OF was known, but it was difficult to make and its boiling point was
2
so low that it had to be considered a cryogenic. O F had been re
2 2
ported, but was unstable at room temperature. NF was known, but
3
its boiling point was too low for a storable. ONF and O NF both had
2
low boiling points, and couldn't be kept liquid at room temperature
by any reasonable pressure. (It was specified, arbitrarily, a few years
later, that a storable propellant must not have a vapor pressure greater
than 500 psia at 71° (160°F). Fluorine nitrate and perchlorate, FNO
3
and FClO , were well known, but both were sensitive and treacherous
4
explosives. Of the latter it had been reported that it frequently det-
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 73
onated "upon heating or cooling; freezing or melting; evaporation or
condensation; and sometimes for no apparent reason."
That left the halogen fluorides. IF and IF both melted above 00C,
5 7
and the thought of carrying that heavy iodine atom around was not
appealing. BrF was unstable. BrF and BrF were known. If either of
3 5
these were to be used, the pentafluoride was obviously the better bet,
since it carried the more fluorine. ClF was low boiling, and didn't have
enough fluorine in it. That left ClF , and maybe BrF in a pinch, or
3 5
when density was all important. (It has a density of 2.466 at 25°.)
And that was it, although JPL in 1947 was dreaming wistfully of
such improbabilities as F O , and the Harshaw Chemical Co. spent a
2 7
good deal of time and money, in 1949 and 1950, trying to synthesize
things like HClF and ArF ,* and naturally (as we say now, with 20-20
6 4
hindsight) got nowhere. They did learn a lot about the synthesis and
properties of OF .
2
So ClF it had to be. Otto Ruff had discovered the stuff in 1930 (as
3
he had also discovered the majority of the compounds listed above)
and the Germans had done a little work with it during the war, and
so quite a lot was known about it. The efflorescence of fluorine chem
istry sparked by the Manhattan Project led to studies in this country,
and the Oak Ridge people, among others, investigated it exhaustively
during the late 40's and early 50's. So it wasn't exactly an unknown
quantity when the rocket people started in on it.
Chlorine trifluoride, ClF , or "CTF" as the engineers insist on call
3
ing it, is a colorless gas, a greenish liquid, or a white solid. It boils at
12° (so that a trivial pressure will keep it liquid at room temperature)
and freezes at a convenient —76°. It also has a nice fat density, about
1.81 at room temperature.
It is also quite probably the most vigorous fluorinating agent in ex
istence—much more vigorous than fluorine itself. Gaseous fluorine,
of course, is much more dilute than the liquid ClF , and liquid fluo
3
rine is so cold that its activity is very much reduced.
All this sounds fairly academic and innocuous, but when it is trans
lated into the problem of handling the stuff, the results are horren
dous. It is, of course, extremely toxic, but that's the least of the prob
lem. It is hypergolic with every known fuel, and so rapidly hypergolic
that no ignition delay has ever been measured. It is also hypergolic
with such things as cloth, wood, and test engineers, not to mention
asbestos, sand, and water —with which it reacts explosively. It can be
* It has recently been shown that an argon fluoride, probably ArF, does exist, but it
2
is unstable except at cryogenic temperatures.
74 Ignition
kept in some of the ordinary structural metals — steel, copper, alumi
num, etc. —because of the formation of a thin film of insoluble metal
fluoride which protects the bulk of the metal, just as the invisible coat
of oxide on aluminum keeps it from burning up in the atmosphere.
If, however, this coat is melted or scrubbed off, and has no chance to
reform, the operator is confronted with the problem of coping with a
metal-fluorine fire. For dealing with this situation, I have always rec
ommended a good pair of running shoes. And even if you don't have
a fire, the results can be devastating enough when chlorine trifluoride
gets loose, as the General Chemical Co. discovered when they had a
big spill. Their salesmen were awfully coy about discussing the mat
ter, and it wasn't until I threatened to buy my RFNA from Du Pont
that one of them would come across with the details.
It happened at their Shreveport, Louisiana, installation, while they
were preparing to ship out, for the first time, a one-ton steel cylinder
of CTF. The cylinder had been cooled with dry ice to make it easier
to load the material into it, and the cold had apparently embrittled
the steel. For as they were maneuvering the cylinder onto a dolly,
it split and dumped one ton of chlorine trifluoride onto the floor. It
chewed its way through twelve inches of concrete and dug a three-
foot hole in the gravel underneath, filled the place with fumes which
corroded everything in sight, and, in general, made one hell of a mess.
Civil Defense turned out, and started to evacuate the neighborhood,
and to put it mildly, there was quite a brouhaha before things quieted
down. Miraculously, nobody was killed, but there was one casualty —
the man who had been steadying the cylinder when it split. He was
found some five hundred feet away, where he had reached Mach 2
and was still picking up speed when he was stopped by a heart attack.
This episode was still in the future when the rocket people started
working with CTF, but they nevertheless knew enough to be scared
to death, and proceeded with a degree of caution appropriate to den
tal work on a king cobra. And they never had any reason to regret
that caution. The stuff consistently lived up to its reputation.
Bert Abramson of Bell Aircraft fired it in the spring of 1948, using
hydrazine as the fuel, NACA and North American followed suit the
next year, and in 1951 NARTS burned it with both ammonia and hy
drazine. \
The results were excellent, but the difficulties were infuriating. Ig
nition was beautiful —so smooth that it was like turning on a hose.
Performance was high —very close to theoretical. And the reaction
was so fast that you could burn it in a surprisingly small chamber. But.
If your hardware was dirty, and there was a smear of oil or grease
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 75
somewhere inside a feed line, said feed line would ignite and cleverly
reduce itself to ashes. Gaskets and O-rings generally had to be of
metal; no organic material could be restrained from ignition. Teflon
would stand up under static conditions, but if the CTF flowed over it
with any speed at all, it would erode away like so much sugar in hot
water, even if it didn't ignite. So joints had to be welded whenever pos
sible, and the welds had to be good. An enclosure of slag in the weld
could react and touch off a fire without even trying. So the welds had
to be made, and inspected and polished smooth and reinspected, and
then all the plumbing had to be cleaned out and passivated before you
dared put the CTF into the system. First there was a water flush, and
the lines were blown dry with nitrogen. Then came one with ethylene
trichloride to catch any traces of oil or grease, followed by another
nitrogen blow-down. Then gaseous CTF was introduced into the sys
tem, and left there for some hours to catch anything the flushing
might have missed, and then the liquid chlorine trifluoride could be
let into the propellant lines.
It was when the stuff got into the motor that the real difficulties be
gan, for a chlorine trifluoride motor operates at a chamber tempera
ture close to 4000 K, where injectors and nozzle throats have a de
plorable tendency to wash away, and unless the materials of which
they are made are chosen with considerable astuteness, and unless the
design is very good, the motor isn't going to last long. The propellant
man liked CTF because of its performance, and the engineer hated
the beast because it was so rough on motors and so miserable to
handle. Although he had to learn to live with it, he postponed the
learning process as long as he could. It is only recently, as the cus
tomers have been demanding a better performance than can be wrung
out of IRFNA-UDMH, that CTF has been the subject of much inten
sive, large scale, testing.
Bromine pentafluoride, BrF is very similar to ClF as far as its
5 3
handling properties are concerned, except that its boiling point
(40.5°), is a little higher. Oddly enough, it never seems to perform as
well as it should, and it's much harder to get a reasonable percentage
of its theoretical performance out of it on the test stand than it is
with CTF. Nobody knows why.
Very early in the game it was apparent to several of us in propellant
chemistry that there really wasn't any fuel available that was right for
ClF . Ammonia's performance was too low, and hydrazine, with an
3
excellent performance and density, froze at a temperature that was
much too high. And everything else had carbon in it. And with a fluo
rine type oxidizer that is bad. (See the chapter on performance.) It
76 Ignition
degrades the performance, and produces a conspicuous smoky ex
haust stream. So in the latter part of 1958 Tom Reinhardt of Bell,
Stan Tannenbaum of RMI and I at NARTS, unknown to each other,
tried to do something about it. And since chemists with similar prob
lems are likely to come up with similar answers, we went about it in
very much the same way. Stan and Tom considered that the best place
to start was with MMH, CH N , which was about as close to hydrazine
6 2
as you could get, and then get enough oxygen into the system to burn
the single carbon to CO. And they did this by mixing one mole of wa
ter with one of MMH, to get a mixture equivalent to COH N . When
8 2
this was burned with CTF the carbon and oxygen went to CO and the
hydrogens burned to HCl and HF. The performance was somewhat
below that of hydrazine, since considerable energy was wasted in de
composing the water, but it was still better than that of ammonia. And
they found that they could add considerable hydrazine (0.85 moles
to one of MMH) to the mixture without raising the freezing point
above —54°. Bell Aerosystems now calls the mixture BAF-1185.
I started with MMH, too. But I remembered all the work we had
done with hydrazine nitrate, N H NO , and used that as my oxygen
2 5 3
carrier, mixing one mole of it with three of MMH. And I found that
I could add a mole or two of straight hydrazine to the mix without
ruining my freezing point. I wanted to do performance calculations,
to see how it would compare with hydrazine, and phoned Jack Gordon
of RMI to get the heat of formation of MMH and hydrazine nitrate.
He was (and is) a walking compendium of thermodynamic data, so I
wasn't too surprised that he had the figures on the tip of his tongue.
But my subconscious filed the fact for future reference.
Anyway, I did the performance calculations, and the results looked
good—about 95 percent of the performance of straight hydrazine,
and no freezing point troubles. So we made up a lot of the stuff and
ran it through the wringer, characterizing it as well as we could, which
was pretty well. We ran card-gap tests * on it, and found that it was
* The card-gap test is used to determine the shock sensitivity of a potentially explo
sive liquid. A 50-gram block of tetryl (high explosive) is detonated beneath a 40 cc
sample of the liquid in question, contained in a 3" length of 1" iron pipe sealed at the
botton with a thin sheet of Teflon. If the liquid detonates, it punches a hole in the ;ar-
get plate, of 3JB" boiler plate, sitting on top of it. The sensitivity of the liquid is mea
sured by the number of "cards," discs of 0.01" thick cellulose acetate, which must be
stacked between the tetryl and the sample to keep the latter from going off. Zero cards
means relatively insensitive, a hundred cards means that you'd better forget the whole
business. As may be imagined, the test is somewhat noisy, and best done some distance
from human habitation, or, at least, from humans who can make their complaints stick.
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 77
quite shock insensitive, in spite of all that oxidizing salt in it. It seemed
to be a reasonably good answer to the problem, so we code-named it
"Hydrazoid N," and stuck it on the shelf for the engineers when they
would need it.
Then, one day, I got a phone call from Stan Tannenbaum. "John,
will you do some card gaps for me?" (RMI wasn't equipped to do them,
and RMI and my outfit always had a comfortable, off-the-cuff, forget
the paperwork and what the brass don't know won't hurt them, sort
of relationship, so I wasn't surprised at the request.)
"Sure, Stan, no problem. What's the stuff you want me to fire?"
He hesitated a moment, and then, "It's proprietary information and
I'm afraid I can't tell . . ."
"(-bleep-) you, Stan," I interrupted amiably. "If you think I'm going
to tell my people to fire something without knowing what's in it
you've got rocks in the head."
A longer pause. I suspect that my reaction wasn't unexpected.
Then, "Well, it's a substituted hydrazine with some oxidizing ma
terial ..."
"Don't tell me, Stan," I broke in. My subconscious had put all the
pieces together. "Let me tell you. You've got three moles of MMH
and one of hydrazine nitrate and — "
"Who told you?" he demanded incredulously.
God forgive me, but I couldn't resist the line. "Oh, my spies are
everywhere," I replied airily. "And it doesn't go off at zero cards
anyway." And I hung up.
But two minutes later I was on the phone again, talking to the
people in the rocket branch in Washington, and informing them that
RMFs MHF-I and NARTS's Hydrazoid were the same thing, that
Stan Tannenbaum and I had come up independently with the same
answer at the same time and that nobody had swiped anything from
anybody. The time to stop that sort of rumor is before it starts!
A few years later (in 1961), thinking that if hydrazine nitrate was
good, hydrazine perchlorate ought to be better, I put together Hy
drazoid P, which consisted of one mole of the latter, N H ClO , four
2 5 4
of MMH, and four of straight hydrazine. It was definitely superior
to Hydrazoid N, with a performance 98 percent of that of hydrazine
itself, and a somewhat higher density. In putting it together, though,
I remembered previous experience with hydrazine perchlorate, and
figured out a way to use it without ever isolating the dry salt, which
is a procedure, as you may remember, to be avoided. Instead, I
added the correct amount of ammonium perchlorate (nice and safe
and easy to handle) to the hydrazine, and blew out the displaced
78 Ignition
ammonia with a stream of nitrogen. Then I added the MMH, and I
was in business. The mixture turned out to be somewhat corrosive to
stainless steel at 1\° (hydrazine perchlorate in hydrazine is a strong
acid) but its behavior when it was spilled was what scared the engi
neers. If it caught fire as it lay on the ground, it would burn quietly
for some time, and theh; as the hydrazine perchlorate became more
concentrated, it would detonate —violently. (Hydrazoid N, or any
similar mixture, it turned out, would do the same thing.)
It seemed likely that if the burning rate of the mixture could be
increased so much that the combustion would take place in the liquid
and not in the vapor phase, the perchlorate would never have a
chance to get concentrated, and the problem might be licked. I knew,
of course, that certain metal oxides and ions catalyzed hydrazine de
composition, but I didn't want this to happen except under combus
tion conditions. The answer seemed to be to wrap the ion in a protec
tive structure of some sort, which would be stripped off at combustion
temperatures. So I told one of the gang to make the acetylacetonate
complex of every metal ion he could find in the stockroom.
He came up with a dozen or so, and we tried them out. Some of
them did nothing at all. Others started decomposing the Hydrazoid
P as soon as they got into solution. But the nickel acetylacetonate did
a beautiful job. It did nothing at all at room temperature or in storage.
But half a percent or so speeded up Hydrazoid P combustion, either
in the air, or when we burned the stuff under pressure as a mono-
propellant, by orders of magnitude. But when we did fire tests in the
open, the results weren't so good. An uncertainty factor had been
introduced into Hydrazoid burning, and instead of detonating every
time it did it about one time in three. So the engineers were still
afraid of it.
A pity, too. For the nickel complex gave the fuel a peculiarly beau
tiful purple color, and somehow I'd always wanted a purple propel-
lant!
Other fuels for ClF have been developed, but they're generally
3
rather similar to those I've described, with the carbon in them bal
anced out to CO by the addition of oxygen, somehow, to the mixture.
On the whole, the problem can be considered to be pretty well under
control. The detonation hazard after a spill is important on the test
stand, but not with a prepackaged missile.
While the preliminary work with CTF was going on, and people
were trying to come up with a good fuel for it, they were also looking
very hard at the oxides of chlorine and their derivatives. Cl O , with
2 7
an endothermic heat of formation of +63.4 kcal/mole, was one of
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 79
the most powerful liquid oxidizers known in the early 50's, and pre
liminary calculations showed that it should give a remarkably high
performance with any number of fuels. It had, however, one slight
drawback —it would detonate violently at the slightest provocation
or none at all. From first to last, at least five laboratories tried to do
mesticate it, with no success at all. The approach was to hunt for addi
tives which would desensitize or stabilize it — Olin Mathieson, alone,
tried some seventy —and was a dismal failure.
The closely related perchloric acid, at first, appeared to be a more
promising candidate. Its heat of formation was exothermic, at least,
and so the acid should show little tendency to decompose to the
elements. However, 100 percent perchloric acid, like nitric acid, is not
entirely what it seems. An equilibrium exists in the concentrated acid:
3HClO ±9 Cl O + H OClO
4 2 7 3 4
so that there is always some of the very sensitive oxide present waiting
to make trouble. And when it triggers the perchloric acid, the latter
decomposes, not to the elements, but to chlorine, oxygen, and H O,
2
with the release of enough energy to scare anybody to death.
I had been ruminating on this fact, and had an idea. The structure
O
of perchloric acid can be written H—O—Cl=O. Now, if the HO
O
O
group were replaced by an F, to give F-Cl=O, what could the stuff
O
decompose to? Certainly there weren't any obvious products whose
formation would release a lot of energy, and the compound ought to
be reasonably stable. And it should be a real nice oxidizer.
So, one day in the spring of 1954, Tom Reinhardt, then the chief
engineer of NARTS, Dr. John Gall, director of research of Pennsalt
Chemicals, and I were sitting around the table in my laboratory shoot
ing the breeze and discussing propellants in general. John was trying
to sell us NF , but we weren't interested in anything with a boiling
3
point of —129°. Then I brought up the subject of this hypothetical
derivative of perchloric acid, added my guess that it would probably
be low boiling, but not so low that it couldn't be kept as a pressurized
liquid at room temperature, and my further guess that it should be
rather inert chemically "because of that hard shell of electrons around
it." And then I asked, "John, Can you make it for me?"
80 Ignition
His reply, delivered with considerable self-satisfaction, was enough
to break up the meeting —and start a new one. "It has been made, its
properties are as you predicted, and, just by coincidence, we just hired
the man who discovered it."
My delighted whoop woke up the firehouse dog half a mile away
— and was the beginning of the perchloryl fluoride program. It seems
that in 1951, some workers in Germany had treated sodium chlorate,
NaClO , with fluorine gas and had obtained sodium fluoride and var
3
ious unidentified gaseous products which they did not identify ~ but
one of them, in hindsight, must have been perchloryl fluoride. Then,
in 1952, Englebrecht and Atzwanger, in Austria, dissolved sodium
perchlorate in anhydrous hydrofluoric acid, HF, and electrolyzed the
solution, mainly, I suspect, to see what would happen. They collected
the gases involved, sorted them out, and isolated perchloryl fluoride
among them. Since hydrogen, fluorine, and a few other items were
all mixed together, they were plagued by explosions, but managed to
survive the process somehow. (Englebrecht was just naturally ventur-
some to the point of lunacy. One of his other exploits was the devel
opment of a fearsome cutting torch burning powdered aluminum
with gaseous fluorine. He could slice through a concrete block with
it, to the accompaniment of an horrendous display of sparks, flames,
and fumes which suggested an inadequately controlled catastrophe.)
I had missed the report of the discovery (it appeared in an Austrian
journal which I didn't normally see) but Pennsalt apparently had not,
and decided that Englebrecht was just the sort of person they wanted
on their staff.
In June BuAer authorized NARTS. to investigate perchloryl fluo
ride, and Pennsalt sent us thirty-three grams of it in October — pain
fully produced by Englebrecht's method. And then, while we tried to
characterize the material, they started looking for a simpler way to
make it. Dr. Barth-Wehrenalp of their laboratories came up with —
and patented —a synthesis by which it could be made rather easily
and cheaply. It worked by the reaction KClO + (excess) HSO F —»
4 3
KHSO + FClO , which looks simpler than it is. Nobody really under
4 3
stands the reaction mechanism.
While we were characterizing it, Pennsalt was doing the same, and
passing their results over to us, and in a few months we knew just
about everything we wanted to know about it. It was a pleasure work
ing with that outfit. I'd phone one day asking, say, for the viscosity
as a function of temperature, and within a week they would have made
the measurements (and measuring the viscosity of a liquid under its
own vapor pressure isn't exactly easy) and passed the results on to me.
In 1955 we were ready for motor work, and Pennsalt shipped—or
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 81
rather hand-carried — ten pounds of perchloryl fluoride to us. (It was
made by the old process, since the new one wasn't yet ready, and cost
us $540 per pound. We didn't mind. We'd expected it to cost a thou
sand!)
With ten pounds of it we were able to make small motor tests (the
fuel was MMH) and found that we had a very fine oxidizer on our
hands. Its performance with MMH was very close to that of ClF with
3
hydrazine, and there wasn't any freezing point trouble to worry about.
It was hypergolic with MMH, but starts were hard,* so we used a start
ing slug of RFNA. Later, Barth-Wehrenalp tried mixing a small
amount of chloryl fluoride, ClO F with it, and got hypergolic ignition
2
that way.f But what made the rocket mechanics happywas the fact
that it varied from all other oxidizers in that you just couldn't hurt
yourself with it, unless, as Englebrecht suggested, "you drop a cylin
der of it on your foot." Its toxicity was surprisingly low, it didn't attack
either inflammables or human hide, it wouldn't set fire to you — in fact,
it was a joy to live with.
What did it in, finally, was the fact that its density at room tempera
ture was rather low, 1.411 compared to 1.809 for CTF, and since its
critical temperature was only 95°, it had a very high coefficient of ex
pansion. Its volume would increase by 20 percent between 25° and
71°, so your tanks always had to be oversized. It is, however, com
pletely miscible with all-halogen oxidizers such as CTF, and can be
added to the latter to help them burn carbon-containing fuels, which
need oxygen. This will probably be its future role.
While PF (so called for security and in deference to the engineers,
who were apparently quite incapable of pronouncing the word "per
chloryl") was being investigated, the next candidate was about to make
its appearance. Several laboratories, at this time, were trying to come
up with storable oxidizers with a better performance than ClF , and
3
in 1957, Colburn and Kennedy, at Rohm and Haas, reacted nitrogen
trifluoride $ with copper turnings at 450° and produced N F by the
2 4
reaction 2NF + Cu-^ CuF + N F .
3 2 2 4
* It seems that liquid perchloryl fluoride reacts with liquid amines, hydrazines, or
ammonia, FClO + HN—R -^HF + OCl—NH—R and the perchloramide-type com
3 2 3
pound is remarkably and violently explosive. Hence the hard starts.
t Chloryl fluoride, ClOF, was first reported by Schmitz and Schumacher in 1942. It
2
is indecently reactive, and the hardest to keep of all the CI-O-F compounds, since it
apparently dissolves the protective metal fluoride coatings that make the storage of
(JlF comparatively simple.
3
t Making NF is tricky enough. It's done by electrolyzing molten ammonium bifluo-
3
ride, using graphite electrodes. They have to be graphite — if you use nickel you don't
get any NF-and the yield depends upon who manufactured the graphite. Don't ask
3
me why.
82 Ignition
Here was something interesting, and the propellant community
leaped into the act with glad cries and both feet. Research went off
in two directions —improving the synthetic method of hydrazine tet-
rafiuoride, as it was called,* for one, and determining its physical
properties and its chemistry for another.
Rohm and Haas came up with a somewhat esoteric, not to say pe
culiar, synthesis when they reacted NF with hot arsenic, of all things.
3
Stauffer Chemical reacted NF with hot fiuidized carbon in a reaction
3
which was easy to control, but which gave a product grossly contami
nated with large amounts of C F , just about impossible to remove. Du
2 6
Pont developed a completely different synthesis, in which NF and
3
NO are reacted at 600° in a nickel flow tube to form N F and NOF.
2 4
Other syntheses took a route through difluoramine, HNF , which was
2
made by reacting urea in aqueous solution with gaseous fluorine to
form F NCONH , and then hydrolyzing this with hot sulfuric acid to
2 2
liberate the HNF . The final step was to oxidize the difluoramine to
2
N F . Callery Chemical Co. did this with sodium hypochlorite in a
2 4
strongly alkaline solution; Aerojet, as well as Rohm and Haas, did it
with ferric ion in acid solution. The Du Pont process, and the HNF
2
-route syntheses are those used today.
(There was some desire to use HNF itself as an oxidizer —its boil
2
ing point is —23.6° and its density is greater than 1.4 —but it is so
violently explosive that the idea never got very far. When it is used as
an intermediate, the drill is to make it as a gas and use it up immedi
ately.)
Dinitrogentetrafluoride was definitely a high-energy oxidizer,
with a high theoretical performance with fuels such as hydrazine.
(Marantz and his group at NBS soon determined its heat of formation
so that accurate calculations could be made) and when Aerojet, in
1962, burned it with hydrazine and with pentaborane they measured
95 to 98 percent of the theoretical performance. And it had a fairly
good density—1.397 at its boiling point. But that boiling point was
—73°,f which put it out of the class of storable propellants.
* NF is an inorganic compound, and should have been named according to the no
2 4
menclature rules of inorganic chemistry, "dinitrogen tetrafluoride" in strict analogy
to "dinitrogen tetroxide" for NO. Instead it was named by the nomenclature rules of
2 4
organic chemistry, as a derivative of hydrazine. This sort of thing was happening all
the time, as organic chemists tried to name inorganic compounds, and inorganic chem
ists made a mess of naming organics!
t This boiling point was a surprise to many, who had expected that it would be some
where near that of hydrazine, or around 100°. But some of us had noted that the boil
ing point of NF was very near that of CF, and hence expected that of NF to be not
3 4 2 4
too far from that of CFn, which is —79°. So some of us, at least, weren't disappointed,
2
since we hucln'l hoped for much.
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 83
And this fact led to the concept of "space-storable propellants."
As you will remember, 1957 was the year of Sputnik 1, when the pub
lic suddenly realized that there might be something to this science-
fiction foolishness of space travel after all. Anything remotely con
nected with space had suddenly become eminently salable, and if the
services weren't able to use N F in missiles, perhaps the space agen
2 4
cies (NACA, later NASA) could use it in space. After all, the hard
vacuum of space is a pretty good insulator, and when you have, in
effect, a Dewar flask the size of the universe available, you can store a
low-boiling liquid a long time. An arbitrary upper limit (—150°) was
set for the boiling point of a space-storable, but the custom is to
stretch this limit to include the propellant you want to sell. OF , boil
2
ing at —144.8° is considered a space storable, but if you want to call
its ideal partner, methane, CH , boiling at—161.5° one too, nobody is
4
going to complain too loudly.
NF is a rather inert material, and its chemistry isn't too compli
3
cated, but N F turned out to be a horse of another color, with a pe
2 4
culiarly rich and interesting chemistry. The propellant men were not
exactly overjoyed by this development, since they much prefer to deal
with an unenterprising propellant, which just sits in its tank, doing
nothing, until they get around to burning it.
N F reacts with water to form HF and various nitrogen oxides,
2 4
with nitric oxide to form the unstable and brilliantly colored (purple)
F NNO, and with a bewildering number of oxygen-containing com
2
pounds to form NF , NOF, N and assorted nitrogen oxides, by re
3 2
actions which are generally strongly dependent upon the exact condi
tions, and frequently affected by traces of water or nitrogen oxides,
by the material of the reactor, and by everything else that the experi
menter can (or cannot) think of. Many of its reactions result from
the fact that it is always partially dissociated to 2NF , just as N O is
2 2 4
always partially dissociated to 2NO , and that the extent of the dis
2
sociation increases with the temperature. This is the way a halogen,
such as Cl , behaves, and N F can be considered to be a pseudo-
2 2 4
halogen. Niederhauser, at Rohm and Haas, thought that as such, it
should add across a double bond, and reacted it, in the vapor phase,
with ethylene —and came up with F NCH CH NF . The reaction
2 2 2 2
proved to be general, and it led to many things, some of which will be
described in the chapter on monopropellants.
The handling and characteristics of N F are fairly well under
2 4
stood now, and it is undeniably a high-performing oxidizer, but it is
difficult to assess its future role as a propellant. It's not going to be
used for any military application, and liquid oxygen is better, and
cheaper, in the big boosters, It may find some use, eventually, in deep
84 Ignition
space missions. A Saturn orbiter would have to coast for years before
the burn which puts it in orbit, and even with the thermal insulation
provided by empty space liquid oxygen might be hard to keep for
that long. And N O would probably be frozen solid.
2 4
When Kennedy and Colburn found dinitrogentetrafiuoride they
knew what they were hunting for. But the next oxidizer was dis
covered by people who were looking for something else.
It seems that at the beginning of 1960, Dr. Emil Lawton of Rocket-
dyne, armed with an Air Force contract, had an idea that looked
wonderful at the time. It was to react chlorine trifluoride with di-
fluoroamine,
ClF + 3HNF -» 3HF + C1(NF )
3 2 2 3
thusly. He put Dr. Donald Pilipovich, "Flip," on the job. Flip built
himself a metal vacuum line and started in. But he didn't get what he
wanted. He got mainly ClNF , plus a small quantity of "Compound
2
X." Compound X showed a strong NF O+ peak on the mass spectrom
2
eter, and the question was the source of the oxygen. He investigated,
and found that the chlorine trifluoride he was using was heavily con
taminated with FClO and ClO .
2 2
Meanwhile, Dr. Walter Maya, of the same group, was making O F
2 2
by an electical discharge in a mixture of fluorine and oxygen. And
he got some air in his line, by accident, and came up with Compound
X too.
Flip was tied up with another job at that-time, so Maya took over the
Compound X problem. He found that an electrical discharge in a
mixture of air and fluorine would give X, but that a discharge in a
mixture of oxygen and NF did even better. Dr. Bartholomew Tuffly
3
of their analytical group invented a gelled fluorocarbon gas chroma-
tograph column to separate the X from the NF , and its mass spectrum
3
and molecular weight identified it unambiguously as ONF or the
3
long-sought F NOF.
2
In the meantime a group at Allied Chemical, Drs. W. B. Fox, J. S.
Mackenzie, and N. Vandercook, had been investigating the electrical
discharge reaction of OF with NF , and had taken the IR spectrum of
2 3
an impure mixture around the middle of 1959, but had not identified
their products. The two groups compared their results and spectra
around January 1961, and found that they had the same compound.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy showed that it was
ONF , and not F NOF.
3 2
And the moral of this story is that it's always worth trying an elec
trical discharge on your mixtures when you're hunting for new com-
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 85
pounds. You never know what will happen. Almost anything can.
Bill Fox's group soon found that ONF could be synthesized by the
3
photochemical fluorination of ONF, and by the flame fluorination of
NO, with a fast quench. The last synthesis is best for relatively large
scale production.
A little later, I was chairing a session on propellant synthesis at one
of the big meetings, and found, on the program, that both Rocket-
dyne and Allied were reporting on ONF . I knew that they differed
3
widely in their interpretations of the chemical bonding in the com
pound, so I rearranged the program to put the two papers back to
back, in the hope of starting a fight. No luck, though — they were both
too polite. Too bad.
Another meeting, some years later, had more interesting results.
In June 1966, a symposium on fluorine chemistry was held at Ann
Arbor and one of the papers, by Professor Neil Bartlett of the Uni
versity of British Columbia, was to be on the discovery and properties
of ONF . Bartlett, a virtuoso of fluorine chemistry, the discoverer of
3
OIF and of the xenon fluorides, had, of course, never heard of
5
Rocketdyne's and Allied's classified research. But Bill Fox, seeing an
advance program, hurriedly had his report on the compound declassi
fied, and presented it immediately after Bartlett's, describing several
methods of synthesis, and just about every interesting property of the
compound. Bill did his best not to make Bartlett look foolish, and
Bartlett grinned and shrugged it off—"well, back to the old vacuum
rack" — but the incident is something that should be noted by the ivory
tower types who are convinced of the intellectual (and moral) superi
ority of "pure" undirected research to the applied and directed sort.
The compound has been called nitrogen oxidetrifiuoride, nitrosyl
trifluoride, and trifluoroamine oxide. The first is probably preferable.
It boils at —87.5°, and its density at that temperature is 1.547. It is
much less active chemically than dinitrogentetrafiuoride, and is
hence much easier to handle. It is stable in most metals, reacts only
very slowly with water or alkalis, or with glass or quartz even at 400°.
In these respects it is very similar to perchloryl fluoride, which has a
similar compact and symmetrical tetrahedral structure, with no reac
tive electrons. It reacts with fluorinated olefins to form C-O-NF
2
structures, and with SbF to form the interesting salt ONF SbFg.
5 2
Its potential as an oxidizer seems to be similar to that of N F , and
2 4
it should be useful in deep space missions.
Rocket motors designed to operate only in deep space are generally
designed to have a comparatively low chamber pressure— 150 psia or
less —and it takes less energy to inject the propellants than would be
86 Ignition
the case with motors designed for sea-level use, whose chamber pres
sure is usually around 1000 psia. (In a few years it will probably be
2500!) And for the low injection pressure requirements of the deep
space motors, some of the "space storables" seem peculiarly well
suited. During the coast period, they could be kept below their nor
mal boiling points. Then as the time for their use approached, a
small energy source (a small electrical heating coil or the like) could
be employed to heat them up to a temperature at which their vapor
pressure would be well above the low chamber pressure of the motor,
and could itself, be the injection pressure source, just as an aerosol
spray is expelled by its own vapor pressure. Dinitrogentetrafluoride,
nitrogen oxidetrifluoride, as well as the long known nitryl fluoride,
FNO , seem to be particularly suitable for this sort of application.
2
Aerojet, during 1963, did a great deal of work along these lines, with
complete success.
It's a good idea, when choosing a pair of "space storables," to
choose a fuel and an oxidizer that have a common liquid (tempera
ture) range. If they are stored next to each other during a mission that
lasts several months, their temperatures are going to get closer and
closer together, no matter how good the insulation is. And if the
temperature toward which the two converge is one at which one pro-
pellant is a solid and the other is a gas, there are going to be diffi
culties when it comes time for them to go to work. Likewise, if the
self-pressurizing type of injection is used, design problems are simpli
fied if the two have vapor pressures that are pretty close to each other.
So, if the designer intends to use ONF , with a boiling point of —87.5°,
3
ethane, whose boiling point is —88.6°, would be a good choice for the
fuel.
Two space-storable systems have been investigated rather inten
sively. RMI and JPL, starting in 1963 or so, and continuing into 1969,
worked out the diborane-OF system, while Pratt and Whitney,
2
Rocketdyne, and TRW, with NASA contracts, as well as NASA itself,
have concentrated their efforts on OF and the light hydrocarbons:
2
methane, ethane, propane, 1-butene, and assorted mixtures of these.
(In most of their motor work, they used a mixture of oxygen and
fluorine as a reasonably inexpensive surrogate for OF .) AU the hy
2
drocarbons were good fuels, but methane was in a class by itself as a
coolant, transpiration or regenerative, besides having the best per
formance. The OF -methane combination is an extremely promising
2
one. (It took a long time for Winkler's fuel of 1930 to come into its
own!)
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 87
The last part of the oxidizer story that I can tell without getting into
trouble with Security is the saga of "Compound A." If I tell it in more
detail than usual, the reasons are simple. The discovery of "A" is
probably the most important achievement to date of the chemists
who have made propellants a career, the story is well documented,
and it illustrates admirably the nontechnical, but bureaucratic and
personal obstacles they had to surmount.
While Walter Maya was doing electrical discharge experiments in
1960-61 (he made NF that way, something that no one else had been
3
able to do, and was trying to get things like N F ) he occasionally got
3 5
trace quantities of two compounds, with absorption bands at 13.7
and 14.3 microns, respectively, in the infra red. And for convenience
he called them "Compound A" and "Compound B." At that point, he
got tied up in another job, and Lawton put Dr. Hans Bauer to the
problem of identifying them. Bauer made slow progress, but finally
got enough A to subject it to mass spectroscopy. And found that it had
chlorine in it. Since only nitrogen and fluorine had been put into the
apparatus, this took some explaining, and it seemed likely that the
chlorotrifluorohydrocarbon (KeI-F) grease used on the stopcocks of
the apparatus was entering into the reaction. Lawton had Bauer
(much against his will) introduce some chlorine into the system, and
it soon was obvious that only chlorine and fluorine were needed to
make "A." From this fact, from the further fact that "A" reacted with
traces of water to form FClO , and from the IR spectrum, Lawton
2
suggested in a report submitted in September 1961, that "A" was
ClF . At that precise moment Rocketdyne's contract (supported by
5
the Advanced Research Projects Administration —ARPA-and moni
tored by the Office of Naval Research —ONR) was canceled.
It seems that somebody in Rocketdyne's solid propellant operation
in Texas, several hundred miles away, had made a security goof re
garding the ARPA program, and Dr. Jean Mock of ARPA felt that
something had to be done by way of reproof. Besides, as he remarked
to Dr. Bob Thompson, Lawton's boss, "Lawton claimed he made ClF
5
and we know that's impossible." So the project lay dormant for half
a year.
Then, about March 1962, Dr. Thompson scraped up some company
R and D money, and told Lawton that he'd support two chemists for
I hree months, doing anything that Lawton wanted them to do. Maya
was put back on the job, and with Dave Sheehan's help, managed to
make enough "A" to get an approximate molecular weight. It was 127
— as compared with the calculated value of 130.5.
88 Ignition
Armed with this information, Lawton went back to ARPA and
pleaded with Dick Holtzman, Mock's lieutenant. Holtzman threw him
out of the office. By this time it was the middle of 1962.
At this time Lawton had an Air Force research program, and he
decided, in desperation, to use their program —and money —to try to
solve the problem. The catch was that the AF program didn't allow
for work on interhalogens, but apparently he figured that if he suc
ceeded all would be forgiven. (In the old Royal Spanish Army there
was a decoration awarded to a general who won a battle fought against
orders. Of course, if he lost it, he was shot.) Pilipovitch was Lawton's
Responsible Scientist by that time, and he put Dick Wilson on the job.
And within a week he had come up with
ClF + F -+ ClF
3 2 5
ClF + 2F -*• ClF
2 5
Cl + 5F -»• 2ClF
2 2 5
CsClF + F -»• CsF + ClF ,
4 2 5
all four reactions requiring heat and pressure.
The next problem was to explain all this to the Air Force. It wasn't
easy. When Rocketdyne's report got to Edwards Air Force Base in
January 1963 the (bleep) hit the fan. Don McGregor, who had been
monitoring Lawton's program, was utterly infuriated, and wanted to
kill him —slowly. Forrest "Woody" Forbes wanted to give him a medal.
There was a fabulous brouhaha, people were shifted around from
one job to another, and it took weeks for things to settle down. Law-
ton was forgiven, Dick Holtzman apologized handsomely for ARPA
and gave Lawton a new contract, and relative peace descended upon
the propellant business. And when I heard, a few weeks later, of the
discovery of ClF (the code name, Compound "A" was kept for some
5
years for security reasons) I sent Emil a letter which started, "Con
gratulations, you S.O.B.! I only wish I'd done it myself!" He was in
ordinately proud of it, and showed it to everybody at Rocketdyne.
ClF is very similar to ClF , but, with a given fuel, has a performance
5 3
about twenty seconds better. It boils at —13.6°, has a density of 1.735
at 25°. And all of the techniques developed for using and handling
CTF could be applied, unchanged, to the new oxidizer. To say that
the propellant community was enthusiastic would be a mad under
statement.
On their ARPA contract the Rocketdyne group, by grace of Dick
Wilson's tremendous laboratory skill, came up with "Florox" —but
Halogens and Politics and Deep Space 89
that one's still classified, and I can't talk about it without getting into
trouble.* But nobody has yet come up with what OClF , which I called
5
"Compound Omega," because it would be just about the ultimate pos
sible storable oxidizer. It would be particularly useful with a fuel con
taining carbon, such as monomethyl hydrazine, CH N , with which it
6 2
would react, mole for mole, to produce 5HF+ HCl + CO+ N -a
2
set of exhaust species to warm the heart of any thermodynamicist.
Lawton and company tried, and are presumably still trying to get it,
and Dr. Sam Hashman and Joe Smith, of my own group, hunted for
it for more than three years, without any luck, although they em
ployed every known synthetic technique short of sacrificing a virgin
to the moon. (A critical shortage of raw material held that one up.)
If anybody ever does synthesize Omega, it will probably be Neil Bart-
lett or somebody in Lawton's group.
A good deal of work has been done with mixed oxidizers, tailoring
the mixture to match the intended fuel. NOTS for one, experimented
in 1962 with "Triflox," a mixture of ClF , FClO and N F , and Penn-
3 3 2 4
salt, for another, examined "Halox," comprising ClF and FClO . In
3 3
this connection, it seems to me that a suitable mixture of ClF and
5
FClO might be almost as good as the elusive Omega to burn with
3
MMH.
One attempt to upgrade the performance of ClF by adding N F
5 2 4
to it came to an abrupt end when the vapor pressure of the liquid
mixture (stored in steel pressure bottles) started to rise in an alarm
ing manner. It seems that the two oxidizers reacted thus:
ClF + N F -> ClF + 2NF .
5 2 4 3 3
And there was absolutely nothing that could be done about it.
Oh, yes. About "Compound B." That's a sad story. It turned out to
be tungsten hexafluoride — WF — apparently from the tungsten fila
6
ment in the mass spectrometer. Even Lawton can't win 'em all!
* Emil Lawton has recently informed me (9/71) that Florox has been declassified
since a Frenchman reported it independently late in 1970. It is OClF, and is made by
3
the fluorination OfClO or, of all things, chlorine nitrate, or ClONO. Its boiling point
2 2
is 30.6°, and it has a high density, 1.852. And since it contains oxygen, it can be used
with a carbon-containing fuel, such as UDMH.
7
Performance
Since I've been talking about "performance" for some thousands of
well chosen (I hope) words, it might not be a bad idea for me to ex
plain, at this point, exactly what I mean by the word.
The object of a rocket motor is to produce thrust —a force. This it
does by ejecting a stream of gas at high velocity. And the thrust is de
pendent upon two factors, the rate at which the gas is being ejected,
in, say, kilograms per second, and the velocity at which it is ejected.
Multiply rate by velocity and you get thrust. Thus, kilograms per sec
ond times meters per second gives the thrust in Newtons. (That is, if
you're a man of sense and are working with the MKS Systeme Inter
nationale of units.) If you want to increase your thrust you can do it
either by increasing the mass flow (building a bigger motor) or by in
creasing the jet velocity, which generally means looking for a better
propellant combination. The performance of a propellant combina
tion is simply the jet velocity it produces.
Sometimes people not in the rocket business ask what is the "power"
of, say, the Saturn V rocket. Power isn't a very useful concept in rock
etry, since what you're trying to give your vehicle is momentum, which
is proportional to the thrust times the time it is exerted. But if you
define the power as the rate at which thermal or chemical energy is
being converted to kinetic energy in the exhaust stream, a meaning
ful figure can be dug out. The kinetic energy of a given mass of ex
haust gas (relative to the rocket, that is, not to the Earth or the Moon
or Mars) is Mc2/2, where M is the mass, and c is the velocity (again,
relative to the rocket). And the power, or rate of energy conversion,
Performance 91
is Mc2/2, where M is the mass flow — kilograms per second, say. But,
as we saw above Mc = F, the thrust. So, putting these together,
Power = Fc/2. Nothing simpler. Let us now proceed to Saturn V.
Saturn V has a thrust of 7,500,000 pounds force. Not mass, mind
you; the distinction is important. That is equal to 33.36 X 106 Newtons.
(One pound force = 4.448 Newtons, the MKS unit of force. That's
a nice thing about MKS-there's no confusion between mass and
force!) I don't remember the exact exhaust velocity of the Saturn en
gines, but it can't be very far from 2500 meters per second. So, mul
tiply 33.36 X 106 by 2.5 X 103 and divide by two —and out comes the
power, neatly in watts.
And the power so calculated is
41.7 X 109 Watts
or 41.7 X 106 Kilowatts
or 41.7 X 103 Megawatts,
which amounts to some 56 million horsepower. For comparison, the
nuclear powerplant of the Enterprise, the most powerful afloat, gen
erates some 300,000 HP. And the mass flow of propellants into the
engines and exhaust gases out of the nozzles is some fifteen tons a
second. Considered as the through-put of a chemical reactor —which
it is — the figure is impressive.
So far, everything has been simple. But now things begin to get a
little sticky. For the question arises, "How do you calculate the exhaust
velocity, c, that you can get out of a given pair of propellants, burned
at a definite chamber pressure, and properly expanded through a noz
zle?" As we saw above, the energy of a given mass of exhaust gas,
E = Mc2/2. Rearranging this, c = (2E/M)1'2. As all of the propellant
injected into a motor comes out as exhaust gas (we hope!), the "M"
in that equation is also the mass of the propellant which produced the
mass of the exhaust gas that we're considering. But the E is not equal
to the thermal energy, H, in the exhaust gas before it was expanded.
So, actually, c = (2H/M X TJ)1'2, where y\ is the efficiency of conversion
of thermal to kinetic energy. And 17 depends upon the chamber pres
sure, upon the exhaust pressure, and upon the nature of the exhaust
gas, both as it exists unexpanded in the chamber and as it changes
during expansion.
So, obviously, we have to know the chemical composition of the gas
in the chamber. That's the first step. And you can't take it by using
simple stoichiometry. If you put two moles of hydrogen and one of
oxygen into the chamber you do not come out with two of water. You
92 Ignition
will have H O there, of course. But you will also, because of the high
2
temperature, have a lot of dissociation, and the other species present
will be H, H , O, O , and OH. Six species in all, and you can't know,
2 2
a priori, in what proportions they will appear. And to solve for six un
knowns you need six equations.
Two of these are simple. The first is derived from the atomic ratio
between hydrogen and oxygen, and simply states that the sum of the
partial pressures of all the hydrogen-bearing species, each multiplied
by the number of hydrogen atoms in it, all divided by the sum of the
partial pressures of all of the oxygen bearing species, each multiplied
by the number of oxygen atoms in it, is a certain value upon which you
have already decided, in this case two. The second equation states that
the sum of the partial pressures of all the species present shall equal
the chamber pressure which you have chosen. The other four equa
tions are equilibrium equations of the type (H)V(H ) = K where (H)
2 1
and (H ) represent the partial pressures of those species, and K is the
2 1
constant for the equilibrium between them at the chamber tempera
ture. This is a very simple case. It gets worse exponentially as the
number of different elements and the number of possible species in
creases. With a system containing carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and ni
trogen, you may have to consider fifteen species or more. And if you
toss in some boron, say, or aluminum, and perhaps a little chlorine
and fluorine —the mind boggles.
But you're stuck with it (remember, I didn't ask you to do this!) and
proceed—or did in the unhappy days before computers. First, you
make a guess at the chamber temperature. (Experience helps a lot
here!) You then look up the relevant equilibrium constants for your
chosen temperature. Devoted and masochistic savants have spent
years in determining and compiling these. Your equations are now
before you, waiting to be solved. It is rarely possible to do this directly.
So you guess at the partial pressures of what you think will be the ma
jor constituents of the mixture (again, experience is a great help) and
calculate the others from them. You add them all up, and see if
they agree with the predetermined chamber pressure. They don't, of
course, so you go back and readjust your first guess, and try again.
And again. And eventually all your species are in equilibrium and you
have the right ratio of hydrogen to oxygen and so on, and they add
up to the right chamber pressure.
Next, you calculate the amount of heat which would have been
evolved in the formation of these species from your propellants, and
compare that figure with the heat that would be needed to warm the
combustion products up to your chosen chamber temperature. (The
same devoted savants have included the necessary heats of formation
Performance 93
and heat capacities in their compilations.) And, of course, the two fig
ures disagree, so you're back on square one to guess another chamber
temperature. And so on.
But all things come to an end, and eventually your heat (enthalpy)
all balances, your equilibria all agree, your chamber pressure adds up,
and you have the right elemental ratios. In short, you know the cham
ber conditions.
The next morning (the procedure described above has probably
taken all day) you have to make a decision. Shall you make a frozen
equilibrium calculation, or shall you make a shifting equilibrium cal
culation? If the first, you assume that the composition of the gas and
its heat capacity remains unchanged as it is expanded and cooled in
the nozzle. If the latter, you assume that as the gases cool and expand
the equilibria among the species shift in accordance with the chang
ing pressure and temperature, so that neither the composition nor the
heat capacity of the exhaust gas is identical with what it was in the
chamber. The first assumption amounts to a statement that all reac
tion rates are zero, the second to a statement that they are infinite, and
both assumptions are demonstrably false.
If you want a conservative figure, you choose to make a frozen
equilibrium calculation. (It gives a lower value than a shifting equilib
rium calculation.) And you plug the data from the chamber calcula
tions into the following horrendous formula.
f Ry Tcr /Pe^Il1'2
I y -I M L VPC/ JJ
Here, R is the universal gas contant, y is the ratio of specific heats,
Cp/Cv of the chamber gases. M is their average molecular weight. Tc
is the chamber temperature. Pe and Pc are the exhaust and chamber
pressures respectively. This formula looks like a mess, and it is, but it
can be simplified to
1/2 f?e\RICp~
2H/M
where H is the sum of the enthalpies of all the species present. (The
reference state of zero enthalpy is taken to be the perfect gas at abso
lute zero.) "M," of course is the mass of propellants which produced
them. And the efficiency, 77, is
_ /Pey/Cp
W
94 Ignition
If you feel optimistic — and energetic —you make a shifting equilib
rium calculation. This is based on the assumption that although the
gas composition will change during the expansion process, the entropy
will not. So your next step is to add up the entropies of all the species
present in the chamber, and put the figure on a piece of paper where
you won't forget it. (Entropies are in the compilations, too.) Then,
you guess at the exhaust temperature, at the exhaust pressure you
have decided upon. And then you determine the composition of the
exhaust gas, just as you did the chamber composition. And add up
the entropies, there, and compare it with the chamber entropy. And
try another exhaust temperature, and so on. Finally you have the
exhaust conditions, and can calculate the enthalpy per unit mass
•2(H - H)l
there. And then, finally, c ; C e ,T) = (H - H)/H
M c e c
Solid and liquid exhaust products complicate the process somewhat
when they appear, but that's the general idea. There is nothing com
plicated about it, but the execution is insufferably tedious. And yet I
know people who have been doing performance calculations for
twenty years and are still apparently sane!
The time and labor involved in an "exact" performance calculation
had two quite predictable consequences. The first was that those calcu
lations which were made were cherished as fine gold (for shifting
equilibrium calculations read "platinum"), circulated, compiled, and
squirreled away by anyone who could get his hands on them. The
second consequence was that everybody and his uncle was demanding
an approximate, or short method. And these were forthcoming, in
considerable variety.
The most elaborate of these took the form of Mollier charts of the
combustion products of various propellant combinations. These
usually plotted enthalpy versus entropy, with isotherms and isobars
cutting across the chart. A typical set of charts would be for the com
bustion products of jet fuel with various proportions of oxygen.
Another, the decomposition products of 90 percent peroxide, an
other, ammonia and oxygen, at various O/F ratios. Some were more
general, applying to a defined mixture of carbon, oxygen, hydrogen,
and nitrogen atoms, without specifying what propellants were in
volved. These charts were easy to use, and gave results in a hurry, but
they seldom applied to exactly the combination you had in mind. They
were also very difficult to construct, involving, as they did, dozens of
calculations. The Bureau of Mines, with its extensive experience with
combustion phenomena, was a leader in this field.
A more general but less informative method was developed in 1949
Performance 95
by Hottel, Satterfield, and Williams at MIT. This could be used for
practically any combination in the CHON system, but using it for any
chamber pressure other than 300 psia, or any exhaust pressure other
than 14.7, was an involved and messy procedure. I later modified
and streamlined the method, and made some provision for other
elements, and published it in 1955 as the "NARTS Method of Per
formance Calculation."
These, and similar graphical methods, involve, essentially, an inter
polation between accurately calculated systems, and they gave a fairly
good approximation of the results of a shifting equilibrium calcu
lation.
The other group of methods gave, generally, results that approxi
mated those of a frozen equilibrium calculation, and were based on
the equation c = (2H/M X TJ)1'2. The usual procedure was to determine
H by ignoring any minor products (pretending that there wasn't
any dissociation). The products in the CHON system were assumed to
be CO , H O, CO, H , and N . Once the water-gas equilibrium was
2 2 2 2
determined (that was done by using the equilibrium constant at some
arbitrary temperature, such as 2000 K, or at the whim of the operator
— it didn't matter too much)* H could be determined by simple
arithmetic. As for -q, with a little experience you could make a pretty
good guess at it, and any error would be halved when you took the
square root of your guess! Or, if you wanted to be fancy, you could
determine the average C of your gases at somewhere near what you
p
thought your chamber temperature ought to be, and plug that into
the efficiency term- Tom Reinhardt's 1947 method included curves
of temperature vs enthalpy for various exhaust gases, as well as C
p
vs temperature. You determined your temperature from your en
thalpy, and the C from the temperature. The temperature, of course,
p
was much too high, since dissociation was ignored. Ten years later I
modified the method, eliminating the curves, devising a fast and easy
way of getting an R/C averaged over the whole temperature range,
p
and providing a nomograph for calculating TJ from that and the
pressure ratio. It was called the NQD-NARTS Quick and Dirty —
method. The thing worked astoundingly well, giving results agree
ing with complete shifting equilibrium calculations (I suppose that
the averaged R/C helped there) to something like 1 percent. And you
p
could make a calculation in fifteen minutes. It worked best, too, when
you postulated the simplest—in fact the most simple minded —set of
* Consider the case where one O, one H and one C react. If the reaction went to
2 2
HO + CO, the performance would vary by only 2.5 percent from the performance
2
if it went to CO and H. And this is the worst possible easel
2 8
96 Ignition
products imaginable. And it was adaptable. When a man from Callery
Chemical Co. came in one day and told me for the first time about the
BN system I learned that. In this system the exhaust products are
hydrogen and solid BN. I hauled out my tables when he told me about
it, and letting two atoms of carbon (graphite) pretend that they were
one of molecule of BN, made a fast estimate. And lit on the nose.
My value was within half a percent of the one he had obtained from a
fancy machine calculation. The only trouble with the method was that
I never could keep a copy for myself. Some character was always
mooching my last copy, and I'd have to run off another fifty or so.
There were other approximate methods developed, some as late as
1963, but they were all similar to those I've described. But the day of
the shorthand method is gone —as is, thank God! —the complete hand
calculation.
The computers started getting into the act in the early 50's, al
though considerable chemical sophistication was needed to make the
most of their initially somewhat limited capabilities. At Bell Aerosys-
tems they were considering fluorine as an oxidizer, and a mixture of
hydrazine and methanol as the fuel, and demanded performance cal
culations. The programmer protested that he couldn't handle that
many elements, and Tom Reinhardt retorted, "The carbon and the
oxygen will go to CO, and you just tell the little man who lives inside
that box to treat it exactly like nitrogen." End of problem.
AU the compilations of thermodynamic data are on punch cards,
now, versatile programs, which can handle a dozen or so elements,
are on tape, and things are a lot simpler than they were. But the chem
ical sophistication is still useful, as is a little common sense in inter
preting the print-out. As an example of the first, calculations were
made for years on systems containing aluminum, using thermody
namic data on gaseous Al O calculated from its assumed structure.
2 3
And the results didn't agree too well with the experimental perform
ances. And then an inconsiderate investigator proved that gaseous
Al O didn't exist. Red faces all over the place. As an example of the
2 3
second, consider the case of a propellant combination that produces
a lot of solid carbon, say, in the exhaust stream. The machine makes
its calculations on the assumption that the carbon is in complete ther
mal and mechanical equilibrium with the gaseous part of the exhaust.
A bit of common sense suggests that this will not be so, since heat
transfer is not an infinitely rapid process, and that the carbon may
well be exhausted considerably hotter than the surrounding gas. So
you look at the print-out with considerable pessimism—and wait for
experimental results before committing yourself.
Performance 97
A great deal of effort, in recent years, has gone into attempts to
develop programs which will take things like heat transfer from solid
to gas into account, and which will allow for the actual velocity of the
change in the exhaust composition during expansion. These are called
"kinetic" programs, as opposed to the frozen or shifting equilibrium
programs, and only the big computers make them possible. There is
only one trouble with them. Reliable kinetic data are as hard to come
by as honest aldermen — and when you feed questionable data into the
machine, questionable results come out at the other end. As the com
puter boys say, "Garbage in —garbage out."
And there is one disconcerting thing about working with a com
puter—it's likely to talk back to you. You make some tiny mistake in
your FORTRAN language — putting a letter in the wrong column,
say, or omitting a comma — and the 360 comes to a screeching halt and
prints out rude remarks, like "ILLEGAL FORMAT," or "UN
KNOWN PROBLEM," or, if the man who wrote the program was
really feeling nasty that morning, "WHAT'S THE MATTER STU
PID? CAN'T YOU READ?" Everyone who uses a computer fre
quently has had, from time to time, a mad desire to attack the pre
cocious abacus with an axe.
Rocket performance is not usually reported in terms of exhaust ve
locity, although the early workers wrote in those terms. Instead, it is
reported as "specific impulse," which is the exhaust velocity divided
by the standard acceleration of gravity, 9.8 meters or 32.2 feet per
second2. This practice gives figures of a convenient size in the range
of 200 to 400 or so, but it has led to some rather tortuous, if not lu
dicrous definitions. The most common one is that specific impulse is
the thrust divided by the weight flow of propellant, and it comes out
in seconds. Putting the acceleration of gravity into the equation did
that, but specifying the performance of a rocket, whose whole job is
to get away from the earth, in terms of the acceleration of gravity on
the surface of that planet, seems to me to be a parochial, not to say a
silly procedure. (The Germans, during World War II, used an even
sillier measure of performance, "specific propellant consumption,"
which was the reciprocal of specific impulse. This didn't even have the
virtue of producing figures of a convenient size, but gave things like
0.00426 per second.)
Probably the best way of thinking of specific impulse is as a velocity
expressed, not in meters or feet per second, but in units of 9.8 meters
(or 32.2 feet) per second. That way you retain the concept of mass
flow, which is relevant everywhere, and doesn't depend upon the local
properties of one particular planet, and at the same time lets Euro-
98 Ignition
pean and American engineers understand each other. When he hears
I = 250, the European multiplies by 9.8 to get the exhaust velocity
s
in meters per second, while the American does the same with 32.2 and
comes out with feet per second. (When will the U.S. ever change over
to MKS?!)
I've told you what performance is, and I've described the way you
go about calculating it. But now comes the practical problem of pick
ing a propellant combination which will give you a good one. Here it
will be helpful to go back to the velocity equation, c = [2H/M]1'2 [1 —
(Pe/Pc)R,Cp]1/2 and to consider the H/M term and the efficiency term
separately. Obviously, you want to make H/M as large as possible.
And to do this, it is useful to consider the exhaust gases you hope to
get. The energy contributed by a molecule of combustion products
equals the heat of formation of that molecule from its elements at
250C, plus its sensible heat above absolute zero (this is a very small
item) minus the energy required to break down to their elements, at
250C, the propellants which formed it. This last term is generally
much smaller than the first—otherwise we wouldn't have useful pro
pellants. And sometimes it is negative; when a mole of hydrazine
breaks down to hydrogen and nitrogen we get some twelve kilocalo-
ries as a free bonus. But the important item is the heat of formation
of the product molecule. That we want as big as possible. And, ob
viously, to maximize H/M, we must minimize M. So, to get a good
energy term, we need an exhaust molecule with a high heat of forma
tion and a low molecular weight.
So far so good. But now let's look at the efficiency term. Obvi
ously, we want to get it as close to 1.0 as possible, which means that we
/p\R/C
e p
want to beat I— I down as far as we can. P/P is, of course smaller
e c
than one, so to do this we must raise the exponent R/C as high as we
p
can. Which, of course, means that we want exhaust products with as
low a Cp as we can find. And so we are hunting for exhaust products
which have:
a. A high heat of formation.
b. A low molecular weight.
c. A low Cp.
Alas, such paragons among exhaust products are hard to come by.
Generally, if you have a good H/M term, the R/C term is bad. And
p
vice versa. And if both are good, the chamber temperature can get
' uncomfortably high.
If we consider specific exhaust products, this is what we find: N
2
Performance 99
and solid C are practically useless as energy producers. HCl, H , and
2
CO are fair.* CO is good, while B O , HBO , OBF, BF , H O, and
2 2 3 2 3 2
HF, as well as solid B O and Al O , are excellent. When we consider
2 3 2 3
the R/Cp term, the order is quite different. The diatomic gases, with
an R/Cp above 0.2, are excellent. They include HF, H , CO, HCl, and
2
N . (Of course a monatomic gas has an R/C of 0.4, but finding a
2 p
chemical reaction which will produce large quantities of hot helium
is out of the range of practical politics.) The triatomic gases, H O,
2
OBF, and CO , with an R/C between 0.12 and 0.15 are fair. The
2 p
tetratomic HBO and BF , at about 0.1, are poor, and B O -WeIl,
2 3 2 3
perhaps it should be passed over in silence. As for the solids, C, Al O ,
2 3
and B O , their R/C is precisely zero, as would be the termal effi
2 3 p
ciency if they were ever the sole exhaust products.
Faced with this situation, all the rocket man can do is hunt for a
reasonable compromise. He would, if he could, choose pure hydrogen
as his exhaust gas, since at any given temperature one gram of hydro
gen has more heat energy in it than a gram of any other molecule
around (one gram of H at 1000 K has almost ten times the energy of
2
one of HF at the same temperature), and its excellent R/C makes it
p
possible to use a large fraction of that energy for propulsion. So hy
drogen is the ideal working fluid, and you always try to get as much of
it as possible into your mix. For it has to be a mix (in a chemical
rocket, anyway) since you need an energy source of some sort to heat
that hydrogen up to 1000 K or 3000 K or whatever. And the only
available energy source is the combustion of some of the hydrogen.
So you bring some oxygen or fluorine into the picture, to burn part of
the hydrogen to H O or HF, bringing the temperature up to 3000 K
2
or so, and your exhaust gas is the mixture of H O or HF with the
2
excess hydrogen. When hydrogen is the fuel, it is always used in
excess, and never burned completely to water or HF. If it were, the
chamber temperature would be uncomfortably high, and the R/C
p
of the mixture would be lowered and the performance would drop.
Hydrogen is so light that a considerable excess of it won't harm the
H/M term appreciably, and you get the maximum performance,
generally, when you use only enough oxygen or fluorine to burn per
haps half of your fuel.
If you're burning a hydrocarbon with oxygen, or if you're working
* The classification of hydrogen, as a fair contributor of energy even though it,
naturally, has a zero heat of formation, is explained by the fact that the molecule is
so light. At 25° it has a sensible heat, or heat content of 2.024 kilocalories per mole
above absolute zero, and since the molecular weight is only 2.016, its H/M, even at
room temperature, is 1.0 Kcal/gm,
100 Ignition
with the CHON system in general, you generally get the maximum
performance from a mixture ratio which gives a 1.05 to 1.20 ratio of
reducing to oxidizing valences in the chamber —that is, you work a
little on the rich side of stoichiometric to get some CO and H into
2
the mixture and improve R/C . ("Rich" and "lean" in the rocket busi
p
ness mean exactly what they do in a carburetor.)
If you're using a halogen oxidizer with a storable fuel, the best
results generally show up if your mixture ratio makes the number of
fluorine atoms (plus chlorine atoms, if any) exactly equal the number
of hydrogen atoms. If there is any carbon in the combination, it's a
good idea to get enough oxygen into the system to burn it to CO, so
you won't have any solid carbon in the exhaust. And if your energy-
producing species is a solid or liquid at the exhaust temperature —
BeO, Al O are examples —the thing to do, of course, is to cram as
2 3
much hydrogen as possible into the combination. *
These are just a few of the things that the propellant chemist has to
consider when he's looking for performance. And coming up with
propellant combinations which will perform as the engineers want
them to is what he's paid for. Inadequately.
This is how he goes about it: The engineering group have been
given the job of designing the propulsion system of a new surface-to-
air missile —a SAM. It is specified by the customer that it must work
at any temperature likely to be encountered in military operations.
The maximum dimensions are fixed, so that the missile will fit on
existing launchers. It must be a packaged job, loaded at the factory,
so that propellants won't have to be handled in the field. It must not
leave a visible trail, which would make countermeasures easier. And,
of course, it must have a much higher performance than the present
system, which burns acid-UDMH. (The customer probably makes a
dozen more demands, most of them impossible, but that will do for a
starter.)
The engineers, in turn, before sitting down to their drawing boards,
demand of the propellant chemist that he produce a combination that
will make the missile do what the customer wants it to do. They also
add some impossible demands of their own.
The chemist crawls into his hole to consider the matter. What he'd
like to recommend is the hydrazine-chlorine pentafluoride (for his
torical reasons, ClF is generally called "compound A") combination.
5
It has the highest performance of any practical storable combination
known (all the exhaust products are diatomic, and 2/3 of them are
HF), and it has a nice fat density, so you can stuff a lot of it into a small
tank. But he remembers that all-weather constraint, and reminds
Performance 101
himself that you can never tell where you might have to fight a war,
and that the freezing point of hydrazine is somewhat incompatible
with the climate of Baffin Land. So —the next best bet is, probably
MHF-3, a 14-86 mixture of hydrazine and methyl hydrazine with the
empirical formula Co.8iH . 2N . Its freezing point is down to the
56 2
magic —54°. (There are other possible fuels, but they may be some
what dangerous, and he knows that MHF-3 is safe, and works.) But,
with ClF , MHF-3 would leave a trail of black smoke leading right
5
back to the launcher — definitely undesirable if the crew of the latter
want to live to fire another round. Also, his professional soul (it's
the only soul he has left after all these years in the business) is re
volted by the thought of that free carbon and its effect on the R/C
p
term and what it will do to his performance.
So he decides to spike his oxidizer with a bit of oxygen to take care
of the carbon. Which means spiking it with an oxygen containing
storable oxidizer. The only one of these which can live with com
pound A is perchloryl fluoride, "PF." So PF it will be.
He knows that when you have carbon and hydrogen in your system,
along with oxygen and fluorine and chlorine, you generally get the
best performance when the oxygen and carbon balance out to CO,
and the hydrogen and the halogens balance to HF and HCl. So he
doodles around a bit, and comes up with the equation:
C .8iH . N + 0.27ClO F + 0.8467ClF
0 562 2 3 5
= 0.81CO + N + 1.1167HC1 + 4.5033HF
2
That looks good —lots of HF and hence a lot of energy. And there's
nothing but diatomic gases in the exhaust, which means a good R/C ,
p
which means, in turn, that a gratifyingly large fraction of that energy
will go into propulsion. To find out what that fraction will be, he
packs up his notes and pays a call on the IBM 360. The results of the
consultation are pleasing, so he converts his mole fractions into weight
percentages, and calls on the engineers.
"Your fuel is MHF-3," he announces, "and your oxidizer is 80 per
cent 'A' and 20 PF. And your O/F is 2.18. And Muttonhead says — "
"Who's Muttonhead? " "Muttonhead's the computer. He says that the
performance, shifting, at 1000/14.7 pounds is 306.6 seconds, and /
say that if you can't wring out 290 on the test stand you're not half as
good as you say you are. But watch your O/F. If you're lean the per
formance will drop off in a hurry, and if you go rich you'll smoke like
crazy: The density is 1.39, and the chamber temperature is 4160 K.
If you want it in Fahrenheit, convert it yourself!"
102 Ignition
He then retreats hurriedly to his lair, pursued by the imprecations
of the engineers, who, (a) complain that the density is too low, and,
(b) that the chamber temperature is much too high and who ever
heard of anybody operating that hot anyway? (c) demand that he do
something about the toxicity of ClF . To which he replies that (a) he'd
5
like a higher density himself, but that he's a chemist and not a theolo
gian and that to change the properties of a compound you have to
consult God about it; (b) to get high performance you need energy,
and that means a high chamber temperature, and unless they're
satisfied with RFNA and UDMH they'll have to live with it, and for
(c) see the answer to (a).
And then, for the next six months or so he's kept busy telling them,
in response to complaints:
"No, you can't use butyl rubber O-rings with the oxidizer! Do you
want to blow your head off?"
"No, you can't use them with the fuel either. They'll go to pieces."
"No, you can't use copper fittings with the fuel!"
"Of course, your mixture ratio goes off if you put five gallons of the
oxidizer in a fifty-gallon tank! Most of the PF is up in the ullage, and
most of the A is down in the bottom of the tank. Use a smaller tank."
"No, there isn't any additive I can put in the oxidizer that will re
duce the vapor pressure of the PF."
"And no, I can't repeal the first law of thermodynamics. You'll
have to talk to Congress!"
And he dreams wistfully of climbing into a cold Martini —and
wonders why he ever got into this business.
8
Lox and Flox and
Cryogenics in General
While all this was going on, liquid oxygen was still very much in the
picture. The sounding rocket Viking burned it with ethyl alcohol, as
had the A-4, and so did several experimental vehicles of the early 50's,
as well as the Redstone missile. Most of these, too, used the auxiliary
power source of the A-4, hydrogen peroxide, to drive the feed
pumps, and so on. The X-I, the first supersonic plane, was driven by
an RMI Lox-alcohol rocket motor.
Other alcohols were tried as fuels to be used with oxygen — metha
nol by JPL as early as 1946, and isopropanol by North American early
in 1951 —but they weren't any particular improvement over ethanol.
Neither was methylal, CH OCH OCH , which Winternitz, at RMI,
3 2 3
was pressured into trying, much against his will (he knew it was a lot
of foolishness) early in 1951. It seems that his boss had a friend who
had a lot of methylal on hand, and if only some use for it could be
found — ? And at NARTS we did some studies for Princeton, using
LOX and pure USP type drinking alcohol — not the denatured stuff.
The only difference we could find was that it evaporated a lot faster
than denatured alcohol when a sailor opened a drum to take a density
reading. We had some very happy sailors while that program was
going on.
But something more potent than alcohol was needed for the X-15
rocket-driven supersonic research plane. Hydrazine was the first
choice, but it sometimes exploded when used for regenerative cool
ing, and in 1949, when the program was conceived, there wasn't
enough of it around, anyway. Bob Truax of the Navy, along with
104 Ignition
Winternitz of Reaction Motors, which was to develop the 50,000
pounds thrust motor, settled on ammonia as a reasonably satisfactory
second best. The oxygen-ammonia combination had been fired by
JPL, but RMI really worked it out in the early 50's. The great stability
of the ammonia molecule made it a tough customer to burn and from
the beginning they were plagued with rough running and combus
tion instability. All sorts of additives to the fuel were tried in the hope
of alleviating the condition, among them methylamine and acetylene.
Twenty-two percent of the latter gave smooth combustion, but was
dangerously unstable, and the mixture wasn't used long. The com
bustion problems were eventually cured by improving the injector
design, but it was a long and noisy process. At night, I could hear the
motor being fired, ten miles away over two ranges of hills, and could
tell how far the injector design had progressed, just by the way the
thing sounded. Even when the motor, finally, was running the way it
should, and the first of the series was ready to be shipped to the West
Coast to be test-flown by Scott Crossfield, everybody had his fingers
crossed. Lou Rapp, of RMI, flying across the continent, found him
self with a knowledgeable seat mate, obviously in the aerospace busi
ness, who asked him his opinion of the motor. Lou blew up, and de
clared, with gestures, that it was a mechanical monster, an accident
looking for a place to happen, and that he, personally, considered
that flying with it was merely a somewhat expensive method of sui
cide. Then, remembering something he turned to his companion
and asked. "By the way, I didn't get your name. What is it?"
The reply was simple. "Oh, I'm Scott Crossfield."
Our first real IRB M's were Thor and Jupiter, and these were de
signed to burn oxygen and JP-4. And the pumps would be driven by a
gas generator burning the same propellants, but with a very rich mix
ture, to produce gases which wouldn't melt the turbine blades. JP had
a better performance than alcohol, and getting rid of the peroxide
simplified matters.
But there were troubles. The sloppy specifications for JP-4 arose to
haunt the engineers. It burned all right, and gave the performance it
should —but. In the cooling passages it had a tendency to polymerize
(you will remember that the specifications allowed a high percentage
of olefins) into tarry substances which slowed the fuel flow, where
upon the motor would cleverly burn itself up. And in the gas gener
ator it produced soot, coke, and other assorted deposits that com
pletely fouled up the works. And, of course, no two barrels of it
were alike. (Also, believe it or not, it grows bacteria which produce
sludge!)
Lox and Flox and Cryogenics in General 105
But they needed the performance of a hydrocarbon; alcohol would
not do. So then what?
Finally somebody in authority sat down and thought the problem
through. The specifications of JP-4 were as sloppy as they were to
insure a large supply of the stuff under all circumstances. But Jupiter
and Thor were designed and intended to carry nuclear warheads,
and it dawned upon the thinker that you don't need a large and con
tinuing supply of fuel for an arsenal of such missiles. Each missile is
fired, if at all, just once, and after a few dozen of them have been
lobbed over by the contending parties, the problem of fuel for later
salvos becomes academic, because everybody interested is dead. So the
only consideration is that the missile works right the first time —and
you can make your fuel specifications just as tight as you like. Your
first load of fuel is the only one you'll ever need.
The result was the specification for RP-I, which was issued in Janu
ary of 1957. The freezing point limit was —40°, the maximum olefin
content was set at 1 percent, and of aromatics at 5 percent. As de
livered, it's usually better than the specifications: a kerosene in the
Ci region, with a H/C ratio between 1.95 and 2.00, containing about
2
41 percent normal and branched paraffins, 56 of naphthenes, three
of aromatics, and no olefins at all.
The polymerization and coking problems were solved, but Madoff
and Silverman, at Rocketdyne (which was the autonomous division
formed at North American to do all their rocket work) weren't en
tirely happy with the solution, and did extensive experimentation
with diethylcyclohexane which, while not a pure compound, was a
highly reproducible mixture of isomers, and was easy to come by.
The results of their experiments were excellent, the fuel being ap
preciably superior to RP-1, but it never got into an operational mis
sile. Atlas and Titan I, our first ICBM's were designed around RP-I
before MadofF and Silverman did their work, and Titan II used
storable propellants. The F-I motors of Saturn V burn LOX and
RP-I.*
Oxygen motors generally run hot, and heat transfer to the walls is
at a fantastic rate. This had been a problem from the beginning, even
with regenerative cooling, but in the spring of 1948 experimenters
* LOX and RP-I never burn absolutely clean, and there is always a bit of free carbon
in the exhaust, which produces a luminous flame. So when you're looking at TV and
see a liftoff from Cape Kennedy — or from Baikonur for that matter — and the exhaust
flame is very bright, you can be sure that the propellants are Lox and RP-I or the
equivalent. If the flame is nearly invisible, and you can see the shock diamonds in the
exhaust, you're probably watching a Titan II booster burning NO and 50-50.
2 4
106 Ignition
at General Electric came up with an ingenious fix. They put 10 per
cent of ethyl silicate in their fuel, which was, in this case, methanol.
The silicate had the happy faculty of decomposing at the hot spots
and depositing a layer of silicon dioxide, which acted as insulation and
cut down the heat flux. And, although it was continuously ablated and
swept away, it was continuously redeposited. Three years later, also
at GE, Mullaney put 1 percent of GE silicone oil in isopropanol, and
reduced the heat flux by 45 percent. The GE first stage motor of
Vanguard used such a heat barrier. Winternitz at RMI had similar
good results in 1950 and 1951 with ethyl silicate in ethanol and in
methylal, and in 1951, with 5 percent of it in ammonia, he cut the
heat flux by 60 percent.
Another tricky problem with an oxygen motor is that of getting it
started. From the A-4 to Thor and Jupiter, a pyrotechnic start was the
usual thing, but the complications were considerable and the reli
ability was poor. Sanger had used a starting slug of diethyl zinc, and
Bell Aerosystems, in 1957, went him one better by using one of
triethyl aluminum to start an oxygen-JP-4 motor. This technique was
used in the later Atlas and all subsequent oxygen-RP motors. A sealed
ampoule containing a mixture of 15 percent triethyl aluminum and
85 percent of triethyl boron is ruptured by the pressure in the fuel
lines at start-up, reacts hypergolically with the liquid oxygen, and
you're in business. Simple, and very reliable.
Alcohol, ammonia, and JP-4 or RP-I were the fuels usually burned
with LOX, but practically every other inflammable liquid available
has been tried experimentally at one time or another. RMI tried, for
instance, cyclopropane, ethylene, methyl acetylene, and methyl
amine. None of these was any particular improvement on the usual
fuels. Hydrazine was tried as early as 1947 (by the Bureau of Aero
nautics at EES, Annapolis) and UDMH was tried by Aerojet in 1954.
But in this country, in contrast to Russia, the combination of a hydra
zine fuel and liquid oxygen is unusual. The only large-scale use of it
was in the Jupiter-C, and the Juno-1 which were propelled by uprated
Redstone motors, redesigned to burn Hydyne rather than alcohol.
(Hydyne is a Rocketdyne developed 60-40 mixture of UDMH and
diethylene triamine.)
Tsiolkovsky's ideal fuel was, of course, liquid hydrogen. It is useless,
naturally, in a missile (its density is so low that it takes an inordinate
tankage volume to hold any great amount of it) and the engineering
problems stemming from its low boiling point are formidable, so it
'was pretty well left alone until after World War II.
Even then, it wasn't exactly easy to come by. There were just three
organizations equipped to produce liquid hydrogen in 1947: the Uni-
Lox and Flox and Cryogenics in General 107
versity of Chicago, the University of California, and Ohio State, and
their combined productive capacity was 85 liters, or 13 pounds, per
hour. (Assuming that the equipment could be run continuously,
which it could not.) But in 1948 H. L. Johnson, of the Ohio State
Research Foundation, burned it with oxygen in a small motor of
about 100 pounds thrust. The next year Aerojet installed a 90-liter
per hour continuous unit, and raised the U.S. capacity to 27 pounds
an hour. Aerojet fired it at the 3000-pound thrust level, and used it
as a regenerative coolant. (Each of the six 200,000 pound hydrogen
motors in Saturn V, five in the second stage, one in the third, burns
80 pounds of hydrogen per second.)
Hydrogen is a super-cryogenic. Its boiling point of 21 K is lower
than that of any other substance in the universe except helium. (That
of oxygen is 90 K.) Which means that problems of thermal insulation
are infinitely more difficult than with oxygen. And there is another
difficulty, which is unique to hydrogen.
Quantum mechanics had predicted that the hydrogen molecule,
H , should appear in two forms: ortho, with the nucleii of the two
2
atoms spinning in the same direction (parallel), and para, with the two
nucleii spinning in opposite directions (antiparallel). It further
predicted that at room temperature or above, three-quarters of the
molecules in a mass of hydrogen should appear in the ortho form
and a quarter in the para, and that at its boiling point almost all of
them should appear in the para state.
But for years nobody observed this phenomenon. (The two forms
should be distinguishable by their thermal conductivity.) Then, in
1927, D. M. Dennison pointed out, in the Proceedings of the Royal
Society, that the transition from the ortho to the para state might be a
slow process, taking, perhaps, several days, and that if the investiga
tors waited a while before making their measurements, they might get
some interesting results.
Urey, Brickwedde and others in this country, as well as Clusius and
Hiller in Germany looked into the question exhaustively between
1929 and 1937, and the results were indeed interesting, and when the
propellant community got around to looking them up, disconcerting.
The transition was slow, and took several days at 21 K. But that didn't
matter to the rocket man who merely wanted to burn the stuff. What
did matter was that each mole of hydrogen (2 grams) which changed
from the ortho to the para state gave off 337 calories of heat in the
process. And since it takes only 219 calories to vaporize one mole of
hydrogen, you were in real trouble. For if you liquefied a mass of
hydrogen, getting a liquid that was still almost three quarters ortho-
hydrogen, the heat of the subsequent transition of that to para-hydro-
108 Ignition
gen was enough to change the whole lot right back to the gaseous
state. AU without the help of any heat leaking in from the outside.
The answer to the problem was obvious — find a catalyst that will
speed up the transition, so that the evolved heat can be disposed of
during the cooling and liquefaction process and won't appear later
to give you trouble; and through the 50's, several men were looking
for such a thing. P. L. Barrick, working at the University of Colorado
and at the Bureau of Standards at Boulder, Colorado, came up with
the first one to be used on a large scale —hydrated ferric oxide. Since
then several other catalytic materials have been found —palladium-
silver alloys, ruthenium, and what not, several of them much more
efficient than the ferric oxide —and the ortho-para problem can be
filed and forgotten.
By 1961 liquid hydrogen was a commercial product, with Linde,
Air Products, and several other organizations ready to sell you any
amount you wanted, and to ship it to you in tank car lots. (The design
of those tank cars, by the way, is quite something. Entirely new kinds
of insulation had to be invented to make them possible.)
Handling liquid hydrogen, then, has become a routine job, al
though it has to be treated with respect. If it gets loose, of course, it's
a ferocious fire and explosion hazard, and all sorts of precautions
have to be taken to make sure that oxygen doesn't get into the stuff,
freeze, and produce a murderously touchy explosive. And there is a
delightful extra something about a hydrogen fire — the flame is almost
invisible, and at least in daylight, you can easily walk right into one
without seeing it.
A rather interesting recent development is slurried, or "slush"
hydrogen. This is liquid hydrogen which has been cooled to its
freezing point, 14 K, and partially frozen. The slushy mixture of solid
and liquid hydrogen can be pumped just as though it were a homoge
neous liquid, and the density of the slush is considerably higher than
that of the liquid at its boiling point. R. F. Dwyer and his colleagues at
the Linde division of Union Carbide are responsible for much of this
work, which is still in the development stage.
The 30,000-pound Centaur, and the 200,000-pound J-2 are the
largest hydrogen-oxygen motors which have been flown, but motors
as large as 1,500,000 pounds (Aerojet's M-I) are on the way.* All
* It's a shame that Tsiolkovsky didn't live to see the M-I. It stands twenty-seven
feet high, the diameter of the throat is thirty-two inches, and that of the nozzle exit
is almost eighteen feet. At full thrust it gulps down almost 600 pounds of liquid hy
drogen and a ton and a half of liquid oxygen per second. Konstantin Eduardovitch
would have been impressed.
Lox and Flox and Cryogenics in General 109
these use electrical ignition. Hydrogen and oxygen are not hyper-
golic but they are very easily ignited. Gaseous oxygen and hydrogen
are admitted to a small pilot chamber, where they are touched off by
an electrical spark, whereupon the pilot flame lights off" the main
chamber. Some work has been done on making oxygen hypergolic
with hydrogen, and L. A. Dickinson, A. B. Amster, and others of
Stanford Research Institute reported, late in 1963, that a minute
quantity (less than a tenth of 1 percent) of O F in liquid oxygen
3 2
would do the job, and that the mixture was stable for at least a week at
90 K (the boiling point of oxygen). O F , sometimes called ozone
3 2
fluoride, is a dark red, unstable, and highly reactive liquid produced
by an electrical glow discharge in mixtures of oxygen and fluorine at
temperatures around 77 K. It has recently been proved that it is
really a mixture of O F and O F . However, it doesn't seem likely
2 2 4 2
that electrical ignition of hydrogen-oxygen motors will be supplanted
for some time.
The ultimate in hydrogen motors is the nuclear rocket. As we have
seen (in the chapter on performance) the way to get a really high
performance is to heat hydrogen to 2000 K or so, and then expand
it through a nozzle. And that is just what a nuclear rocket motor does.
A graphite-moderated enriched uranium reactor is the energy
source, and the hydrogen is the working fluid. (During development,
one peculiar difficulty showed up. Hydrogen at 2000 K or so dissolves
graphite —it goes to methane —like hot water working on a sugar
cube. The answer —coat the hydrogen flow passages with niobium
carbide.)
The Phoebus-1 motors, tested at Jackass Flats (lovely name!),
Nevada in 1966, with an 1100 megawatt (thermal) reactor, operated
successfully at the 55,000-pounds thrust level, with a specific impulse
of 760. (Impulses above 850 are expected soon.) The power (rate of
change of thermal energy to mechanical energy) was thus some 912
megawatts, which implies that the reactor was working somewhat
above its nominal rating. The chamber temperature was about
2300 K.
The Phoebus-2 series nuclear engines, under development, are
expected to operate at the 250,000-pounds thrust level; greater than
the thrust of the J-2 and the reactor power (thermal) will be about
5000 megawatts. This is twice the power generated by the Hoover
dam —and the reactor generating it is about the size of an office desk.
An impressive little gadget.
Liquid fluorine work started about the same time as the liquid hy
drogen work did. JPL, starting in 1947, was the pioneer. It wasn't
110 Ignition
particularly available at that time, so they made and liquefied the
fluorine on the site, a feat which inspires the respect of anyone who
has ever tried to make a fluorine cell work for any length of time.
They burned it first with gaseous hydrogen, but by 1948 they had
succeeded in firing liquid hydrogen, and were using the latter as a
regenerative coolant. And by the spring of 1950 they had done the
same with hydrazine. Considering the then state of the technology,
their achievement was somewhat miraculous.
Bill Doyle, at North American, had also fired a small fluorine motor
in 1947, but in spite of these successes, the work wasn't immediately
followed up. The performance was good, but the density of liquid
fluorine (believed to be 1.108 at the boiling point) was well below
that of oxygen, and the military (JPL was working for the Army at
that time) didn't want any part of it.
This situation was soon to change. Some of the people at Aerojet
simply didn't believe Dewar's 54-year-old figure on the density of
liquid fluorine, and Scott Kilner of that organization set out to
measure it himself. (The Office of Naval Research put up the money.)
The experimental difficulties were formidable, but he kept at it, and
in July, 1951, established that the density of liquid fluorine at the
boiling point was not 1.108, but rather a little more than 1.54. There
was something of a sensation in the propellant community, and
several agencies set out to confirm his results. Kilner was right, and
the position of fluorine had to be re-examined. (ONR, a paragon
among sponsors, and the most sophisticated —by a margin of several
parsecs — funding agency in the business, let Kilner publish his
results in the open literature in 1952, but a lot of texts and references
still list the old figure. And many engineers, unfortunately, tend to
believe anything that is in print.)
Several agencies immediately investigated the performance of
fluorine with hydrazine and with ammonia and with mixtures of the
two, and with gratifying results. Not only did they get a good per
formance, but there were no ignition problems, liquid fluorine being
hypergolic with almost anything that they tried as a fuel.
Unfortunately, it was also hypergolic with just about everything
else. Fluorine is not only extremely toxic; it is a super-oxidizer, and
reacts, under the proper conditions with almost everything but nitro
gen, the lighter of the noble gases, and things that have already been
fiuorinated to the limit. And the reaction is usually violent.
It can be contained in several of the structural metals — steel, cop
per, aluminum, etc.—because it forms, immediately, a thin, inert
coating of metal fluoride which prevents further attack. But if that
Lox and Flox and Cryogenics in General 111
inert layer is scrubbed off, or melted, the results can be spectacular.
For instance, if the gas is allowed to flow rapidly out of an orifice or
a valve, or if it touches a spot of grease or something like that, the
metal is just as likely as not to ignite —and a fluorine-aluminum fire
is something to see. From a distance.
But, as is usually the case, the stuff can be handled if you go about
it sensibly, and if you want to fire it in a rocket, Allied Chemical Co.
will be glad to ship you a trailer truck full of liquid fluorine. That
trailer is a rather remarkable device in itself. The inner fluorine tank
is surrounded by a jacket of liquid nitrogen, to prevent the evapora
tion and escape of any fluorine into the atmosphere. All sorts of pre
cautions—pilot trucks, police escorts, and what not —are employed
when one of those trucks travels on a public road, but sometimes I've
wondered what it would be like if a fluorine tank truck collided with
one carrying, say, liquid propane or butane.
The development of large fluorine motors was a slow process, and
sometimes a spectacular one. I saw one movie of a run made by Bell
Aerosystems, during which a fluorine seal failed and the metal
ignited. It looked as though the motor had two nozzles at right angles,
with as much flame coming from the leak as from the nozzle. The
motor was destroyed and the whole test cell burned out before the
operators could shut down.
But good-sized fluorine motors have been developed and fired
successfully, although none have yet flown in a space mission. Rocket-
dyne built Nomad, a 12,000-pound motor, burning fluorine and
hydrazine, for upper stage work, and Bell developed the 35,000-
pound Chariot for the third stage of Titan III. This burned fluorine
and a mixture of monomethyl hydrazine, water, and hydrazine,
balanced to burn to CO and HF, and to have a freezing point con
siderably below that of hydrazine. And GE has developed the 75,000-
pound X-430 fluorine-hydrogen motor.
Ordin at LFPL, from 1953 on, and then the people at Rocketdyne,
in the late 50's and early 60's, investigated the possibility of upgrading
the performance of an RP-Lox motor by adding fluorine to the
oxidizer (fluorine and oxygen are completely miscible, and their
boiling points are only a few degrees apart), and found that 30 per
cent of fluorine in the lox raised the performance by more than 5
percent, and could still be tolerated (Rocketdyne burned it in an
Atlas motor) by tanks, pumps, etc. which had been designed for liquid
oxygen. And they got hypergolic ignition, as a bonus. The mixture of
liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen is called "Flox," with the usually
appended number signifying the percentage of fluorine. For maxi-
112 Ignition
mum performance the combination should burn (with a hydrocarbon)
to HF and CO, which means that Flox 70 is the best oxidizer for RP-I
— at least as far as performance goes. The specific impulse of RP-I
and liquid oxygen (calculated at 1000 psi chamber pressure, 14.7
exhaust, shifting equilibrium, optimum O/F) is 300 seconds, with
Flox 30 it is 316, with Flox 70 (which balances to CO and HF) it is 343
seconds, and with pure fluorine it drops to 318.
Fluorine is not likely ever to be used for the big boosters —all that
HF in the exhaust would be rough on the launching pad and equip
ment, not to mention the surrounding population —and it's more
expensive than oxygen by orders of magnitude, but for deep space
work its hard to think of a better combination than hydrogen and
fluorine. It's on its way.
The future of ozone doesn't look so promising. Or, to be precise,
ozone has been promising for years and years but hasn't been de
livering.
Ozone, O , is an allotropic form of oxygen. It's a colorless gas, or
3
if it's cold enough, a beautiful deep blue liquid or solid. It's manu
factured commercially (it's useful in water purification and the like)
by the Welsbach process which involves an electrical glow discharge
in a stream of oxygen. What makes it attractive as a propellant is that
(1) its liquid density is considerably higher than that of liquid oxygen,
and (2) when a mole of it decomposes to oxygen during combustion
it gives off 34 kilocalories of energy, which will boost your perform
ance correspondingly. Sanger was interested in it in the 30's, and the
interest has endured to the present. In the face of considerable dis
illusionment.
For it has its drawbacks. The least of these is that it's at least as
toxic as fluorine. (People who speak of the invigorating odor of ozone
have never met a real concentration of it!) Much more important is
the fact that it's unstable — murderously so. At the slightest provoca
tion and sometimes for no apparent reason, it may revert explosively
to oxygen. And this reversion is catalyzed by water, chlorine, metal
oxides, alkalis —and by, apparently, certain substances which have
not been identified. Compared to ozone, hydrogen peroxide has the
sensitivity of a heavyweight wrestler.
Since pure ozone was so lethal, work was concentrated on solutions
of ozone in oxygen, which could be expected to be less dangerous.
The organizations most involved were the Forrestal Laboratories of
Princeton University, the Armour Research Institute, and the Air
Reduction Co. Work started in the early 50's, and has continued, on
and off, ever since.
Lox and Flox and Cryogenics in General 113
The usual procedure was to run gaseous oxygen through a WeIs-
bach ozonator, condense the ozone in the emergent stream into liquid
oxygen until you got the concentration you wanted, and then use this
mixture as the oxidizer in your motor run. During 1954-57, the For-
restal fired concentrations of ozone as high as 25 percent, using
ethanol as the fuel. And they had troubles.
The boiling point of oxygen is 90 K. (In working with cryogenics,
it's much simpler to think and talk in absolute of Kelvin degrees than
in Celsius.) That of ozone is 161 K. On shutdown, the inside of the
oxidizer lines would be wet with the ozone-oxygen mixture, which
would immediately start to evaporate. The oxygen, with the lower
boiling point, would naturally come off first, and the solution would
become more concentrated in ozone. And when that concentration
approaches 30 percent, at any temperature below 93 K, a strange
thing happens. The mixture separates into two liquid phases, one
containing 30 percent ozone, and the other containing 75 percent.
And as more oxygen boils off, the 30-percent phase decreases, and
the 75-percent phase increases, until you have only one solution again
— all 75 percent ozone. And this mixture is really sensitive!
So, after a series of post-shutdown explosions which were a bit
hard on the plumbing and worse on the nerves of the engineers,
some rather rigorous purging procedures were adopted. Immediately
after shutdown, the oxidizer lines were flushed with liquid oxygen,
or with gaseous oxygen or nitrogen, to get rid of the residual ozone
before it could cause trouble.
That was some sort of a solution to the problem but not a very
satisfactory one. Twenty-five percent ozone in oxygen is not so
superior to oxygen as to make its attractions overwhelmingly more
important than the difficulty of handling it. A somewhat superior
solution would be to eliminate the phase separation somehow, and in
1954-55 G. M. Platz of the Armour Research Institute (now IITRI,
or the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute) had some
success in attempting to do this. He showed that the addition of about
2.8 percent of Freon 13, CClF , to the mixture would prevent phase
3
separation at 90 K, although not at 85 K. Which meant that if you
had, say, a 35-percent mixture at the boiling point of oxygen, it would
remain- homogeneous, but if you cooled it to the boiling point of
nitrogen, 77 K, the high concentration, lethal, phase would separate
out. W. K. Boyd, W. E. Berry and E. L. White, of Battelle, and W. G.
Marancic and A. G. Taylor of Air Reduction, came up with a better
answer in 1964-65, when they showed that 5 percent of OF or 9
2
percent of F added to the mixture completely eliminated the phase
2
114 Ignition
separation problem. And their addition didn't degrade the per
formance, as the Freon would have. Nobody has yet come up
with an even faintly plausible explanation for the solubilizing effect of
the additives!
One other ozone mixture has been considered — that of ozone and
fluorine, which was thoroughly investigated during 1961 by A. J.
Gaynor of Armour. (Thirty percent of ozone would be optimum for
RP-I.) But the improvement over Flox 70 wouldn't be too impressive,
and the thought of what might happen if the ozone in the oxidizer
let go on the launching pad and spread the fluorine all over the
landscape was somewhat unnerving, and I have heard of no motor
runs with the mixture.
For ozone still explodes. Some investigators believe that the ex
plosions are initiated by traces of organic peroxides in the stuff,
which come from traces, say, of oil in the oxygen it was made of.
Other workers are convinced that it's just the nature of ozone to
explode, and still others are sure that original sin has something to do
with it. So although ozone research has been continuing in a desultory
fashion, there are very few true believers left, who are still convinced
that ozone will somehow, someday, come into its own. Fm not one
of them.
9
What Ivan Was Doing
When the Russians moved into Germany, they put the chemists at
the Luena works of LG. Farben to work at propellant research. True,
these weren't propellant men, but to the Russians apparently a chemist
was a chemist was a chemist and that was all there was to it. ARPA did
something similar in this country a good many years later! At first
the Germans didn't do much except determine .the properties of the
known rocket fuels, but when they were sent to Russia in October
1946 (some went to the State Institute of Applied Chemistry at
Leningrad, the others to the Karpov Institute at Moscow) they were
put to work synthesizing new ones, some to be used neat, some for
additives to gasoline or kerosene. For the Soviets, like the Germans
before them, were hunting for hypergols, and additives that would
make gasoline hypergolic with nitric acid.
And, the nature of chemists and of chemistry being what it is, the
paths they took were the same ones we took. They investigated the
vinyl ethers, as the Germans had done before them, and then, in
1948, four years before NYU did the same thing, they synthesized
and tried every acetylenic that they could think of. In 1948 they tried
the allyl amines; Mike Pino at California Research was doing the same
thing at the same time. They investigated the tetraalkyl ethylene
diamines in 1949, two years before Phillips Petroleum got around to
it. And, in 1948 and 1949 they worked over the mercaptans and the
organic sulfides, just as Pino was doing. They investigated every
amine they could get their hands on or synthesize, and they tried
such mixed functional compounds as vinyloxyethylamine. And
116 Ignition
everything they made they mixed with gasoline —usually a pyrolytic,
or high-aromatic type, in the hope that they could get a good hyper-
golic mixture. They even tried elemental sulfur, in some of their
mixtures. But for a long time the most satisfactory fuel for their
tactical missiles was the German-developed Tonka 250, mixed xyli-
dines and triethylamine. The second stage of the SA-2 or Guideline
(U.S. designations —we don't know theirs) surface-to-air missile used
by North Vietnam uses that fuel, along with RFNA.
Home-made hydrazine hydrate (rather than captured German
stuff) was available in the Soviet Union by 1948, but there was ap
parently little interest in hydrazine or its derivatives until about 1955
or 1956, when the Soviet chemists (all the Germans had been sent
home by 1950) learned of our success with UDMH. The lack of in
terest may have been caused by the incompatibility of copper and
hydrazine; and their engineers liked to make their motors out of cop
per, because of its beautiful heat-transfer properties. And, of course,
the Russian climate has a tendency to discourage the use of hydrazine.
UDMH, now, is one of their standard propellants.
Some work was done with high-strength peroxide, first with
captured German material, and, after 1950, with Russian product, but
there never was much interest in it, and finally the Navy took over all
peroxide work. (It's very useful in torpedoes.)
The nitric acids used in the late 40's and early 50's were a 98 per
cent WFNA, WFNA containing 4 percent of ferric chloride as an
ignition catalyst, and a mixed acid containing 10 percent sulfuric
acid. And they had all the troubles with it that we had. They tried
organic sulfonic acids — methane sulfonic, methane di and trisulfonic,
ethane disulfonic, and ordinary disulfonic acid —as corrosion inhib-
iters in 1950 and 1951 (two years before California Research tried
them) but used them in little more than trace quantities, a percent
or so. They didn't work, naturally.
But in spite of the nitric acid troubles, one of the Germans be
thought himself of Noggerath's equation relating propellant density
to range, and decided to make a few points with his new bosses.*
* As a first approximation, the range of a missile is proportional to its boost velocity,
squared. And Noggerath related the boost velocity to exhaust velocity and propellant
density by the equation:
c = c In (1 + d<«,
b
where c is the boost velocity, c the exhaust velocity, d the bulk density of the pro
b
pellants, and <f> a loading factor —the total tank volume of the missile, in liters, say,
divided by the dry mass (all propellants burned) of the missile, in kilograms. So the
range depends very strongly upon l he exhaust velocity, but upon the density by a
What Ivan Was Doing 117
He decided that a V-2 loaded with nitric acid and a really high-density
fuel would have a range that would make him a Hero of the Soviet
Union, at least, and set out to make that really high density fuel. So
he mixed up 10 percent of toluene, and 50 percent of dimethyl-
aniline, and 40 percent of dibromoethane. He got a high density all
right —something like 1.4 —but what those bromines did to the
specific impulse was a crime. His Russian bosses, who were not fools,
took one horrified look at what he was doing, and immediately took
all his chemicals away from him. And four weeks later he was hauled
up before a People's Tribunal, tried, convicted, and fined 4000 rubles
for, in the words of the court, "Misleading Soviet Science." He was
lucky. If I had been on the tribunal he'd have gone to Siberia for
ninety years, and the charge would have been Exuberant Stupidity.
The Russians were happy when he went back home. With an ally
like that who needs enemies?
Other attempts at high-density fuels were made; 8 percent of
colloidal aluminum suspended with aluminum stearate in kerosene
was one of them. But it froze at— 6°, and the investigators lost interest.
And they tried various nitro-organics such as nitro-propene —the
name alone is enough to scare me to death —as monopropellants,
with no success to mention, and, as the Germans had before them,
tried to use tetranitromethane as an oxidizer. And blew up a labo
ratory trying it.
Recently they have been showing considerable interest in mixtures
of hydrazine nitrate and methyl hydrazine (like my Hydrazoid N) but
whether they intend it for a fuel or for a monopropellant we don't
know. Their first ballistic missile the SS-IA (NATO designation),
was a carbon copy of the A-4, and burned 70 percent alcohol and
liquid oxygen. Liquid oxygen was available in quantity, since the
Soviets use the highly efficient and very fast air liquefier designed by
Peter Kapitza. The larger missiles, SS-2, "Sibling" of 1954, and the
SS-3 "Shyster" of 1956 used the same combination, except that the
concentration of the alcohol was 92.5 rather than 70 percent.
But, as you may remember, the U.S. specifications for nitric acid,
including the HF inhibitor, were published in 1954. So the next
Soviet ballistic missile was a redesigned SS-IA, the SS-IB, or "Scud,"
and burned kerosene and IRFNA. They presumably used a starting
slug —perhaps triethylamine — and the kerosene they use is a high
logrithmic function which, varies with the loading factor. If <f> is very small, as it would
be in a plane with JATO attached, the density is almost as important as the exhaust
velocity. If it is very large, as an ICBM, the density of the propellants is much less
important.
118 Ignition
naphthenic type, very similar to RP-I. They prefer this to other
types since it is much less liable to coking than, say, a high-olefinic
mixture when it is used for regenerative cooling. Suitable crudes are
abundant in the Soviet Union. There are two "rocket" grades of
IRFNA commonly used in the U.S.S.R., AK-20, containing 20 percent
of N O , and AK-27 containing 27 percent.
2 4
From the advent of "Scud," the presence of two design groups in
the Soviet Union has been apparent, and the Soviet high command,
presumably to keep peace in the family, splits development projects
between the two. This procedure is not exactly unheard of in this
country, where a contract awarded to Lockheed may be followed by
one to General Dynamics.
One group remains wedded to liquid oxygen, and designed the
SS-6, SS-8 and SS-IO. SS-6, the monstrous 20-barreled beast that
lifted Yuri Gagarin and Vostok I into orbit, burned oxygen and the
equivalent of RP-I. SS-8, "Sasin," and SS-10 burn oxygen and, ap
parently a hydrazine-UDMH mixture equivalent to our 50-50.
The other group swears by storable oxidizers, IRFNA or N O ,
2 4
using the latter in the big strategic missiles which live in steam-heated
silos, and the former usually in shorter range tactical missiles which
have to cope with the Russian winter. The SS-4 "Sandal" uses IRFNA
and apparently a mixture of RP and UDMH (compare U.S. Nike
Ajax), while the SS-5 IRBM "Skean" and the SS-7 ICBM burn acid
and UDMH. The recently deployed SS-9 ICBM "Scarp," a kissing
cousin to the U.S. Titan II, but somewhat larger, burns N O with,
2 4
probably 50-50. There has been some conjecture that it may burn
MMH, but that appears unlikely. Fifty-fifty is much cheaper, gives the
same performance or a little better, and with a strategic missile you
don't have to worry about the freezing point of the fuel. The smaller
SS-Il uses the same propellants, and the SS-12, a tactical missile
more or less equivalent to the U.S. "Lance," burns IRFNA and RP.
(To bring things up to date, the SS-13 is a three-stage solid propellant
equivalent to "Minuteman," and'the SS-14 is essentially, the two upper
stages of SS-13.) The Soviet naval missiles comparable to "Polaris,"
use IRFNA or N O with UDMH or 50-50, or are solid propelled.
2 4
And the Chinese ballistic missiles under development are based on the
SS-3, modified to burn IRFNA and kerosene.
As for more advanced, or "exotic" propellants, the Soviet practice
has apparently been more conservative than that of the United
States. The Russians did some work with boranes in 1949-1950, but
had sense enough to quit before they wasted a lot of time and money.
There were some firings with 10 percent ozone in oxygen in East
What Ivan Was Doing 119
Germany in 1952, but there is no evidence that this work was followed
up. Nor is there any evidence of extensive work with halogenated
oxidizers. In a long review article on perchloryl fluoride in a Soviet
chemical journal recently, all the references were to western sources.*
There has been some mention of OF , and of the alleged virtues of
2
metal slurries, but nothing to indicate that it amounts to more than
words. Nor is there any indication that they have done much with liq
uid fluorine or with liquid hydrogen, although it would be surprising,
to say the least, if the use of the latter in their space program had not
been considered.
In short, the Russians tend to be squares in their choice of propel-
lants. Oxygen, N O , IRFNA, RP, UDMH and its mixes - that's about
2 4
the lot. When he wants more thrust, Ivan doesn't look for a fancy pro-
pellant with a higher specific impulse. He just builds himself a bigger
rocket. Maybe he's got something there.
* Of course this may mean that they are about to start working with it. Such review
articles, in the U.S.S.R., frequently signal the start of a research program.
10
"Exotics"
Fifteen years ago people used to ask me "What is an exotic fuel any
way?" and I would answer "It's expensive, it's got boron in it, and it
probably doesn't work." I had intended, originally, to entitle this chap
ter "The Billion Buck Boron Booboo," but decided against it on two
grounds. The first was that such a title might conceivably be consid
ered tactless by some of the people who authorized the programs con
cerned. The second reason is that it would not be completely accurate.
Actually, the boron programs did not cost a billion dollars. It just
seemed that way at the time.
The boranes are compounds of boron and hydrogen, the best
known (although there are many others) being diborane, B H ; pen-
2 6
taborane, B H ; and decaborane, B H . At room temperature the
5 9 10 14
first is a gas, the second a liquid, and the third a solid. Alfred Stock
discovered most of the better known boranes between 1912 and 1933,
while H. I. Schlesinger, starting about 1930, contributed vastly to the
field of borane chemistry, and in particular to the development of
synthetic routes.
Boranes are unpleasant beasts. Diborane and pentaborane ignite
spontaneously in the atmosphere, and the fires are remarkably diffi
cult to extinguish. They react with water to form, eventually, hydro
gen and boric acid, and the reaction is sometimes violent. Also, they
not only are possessed of a peculiarly repulsive odor; they are ex
tremely poisonous by just about any route. This collection of proper
ties does not simplify the problem of handling them. They are also
very expensive since their synthesis is neither easy nor simple.
"Exotics" 121
But they possess one property which attracted rocket people to
them as hippies to a happening. They have an extremely high heat of
combustion — gram for gram about 50 percent more than jet fuel. And
from 1937 on, when Parsons at JPL had first considered decaborane,
propellant men had been considering them wistfully, and lusting af
ter the performance which might, with luck, be wrung out of that heat
of combustion.
Nothing could be done about it, of course, until World War II was
over. But in 1946 the U.S. Army Ordnance Corps awarded a contract
to GE (Project Hermes), to investigate the boranes in depth, and to
develop methods of large scale synthesis. The primary objective was
not the development of rocket propellants, but the exploitation of the
boranes as fuels for air-breathing engines, primarily jets. But the
rocket people, as was inevitable with their preoccupations, got in
volved anyway.
It was Paul Winternitz, at Reaction Motors, who in 1947 made what
were probably the first performance calculations on the boranes. He
calculated the performance of diborane, pentaborane, and aluminum
borohydride, Al(BHJ , all with liquid oxygen. Considering the scanti
3
ness and general unreliability of the thermodynamic data, not only
on these would-be propellants but on their combustion products as
well, not to mention the complexity of the calculations (no computers
around then, remember!), my admiration of his industry is only
equaled by my astonishment at his courage.
At any rate, the numbers that came out at the other end of the cal
culation, whatever their validity or lack of it, looked encouraging. The
next step was to confirm them with motor firings. Diborane (the most
available of the boranes) was to be the fuel, and liquid oxygen the
oxidizer.
Diborane was the most available of the boranes, but it wasn't exactly
abundant. In fact, there were precisely forty pounds of it in existence
when RMI started work. So the firings were necessarily at a very low
thrust level (perhaps fifty pounds) and were extremely short. At that,
as the engineer in charge confessed to me many years later, "Every
time I pushed the button I could feel the price of a Cadillac going
down the tailpipe!"
The results, not to put too fine a point on it, did not encourage eu
phoria. The performance was dismally bad —far below theoretical —
and solid glassy deposits appeared in the throat (changing its size and
shape) and in the diverging (downstream) section of the nozzle. These
consisted, apparently, mostly of B O , but appeared to contain some
2 3
elemental boron as well. This was a sure indication of poor combus
tion, and was not encouraging.
122 Ignition
Ordian and Rowe, at NASA-Lewis, fired the same combination in
1948, and got much the same sort of results. Nor were the results any
better when they used hydrogen peroxide as the oxidizer. The glassy
deposits seemed to be as characteristic of borane firings as was the
bright green exhaust flame.
The next fuel that RMI tried was the dimethylamine adduct of di-
borane —not exactly a borane, but a close relative. But when they fired
it with oxygen, in 1951, the results were borane results —and discour
aging. So were their results with pentaborane, which Jack Gould fired
the next year in a fifty-pound thrust motor, using oxygen and hydro
gen peroxide as oxidizers. It would be some twelve years before any
body could get good results with that last combination. One with bet
ter combustion efficiency was fired by Ordin in 1955 —diborane and
fluorine. Here, at least, there weren't any deposits in the nozzle —BF
3
is a gas —but the combination was a fiendishly hot one, and very dif
ficult to handle.
The early borane firings weren't, on the whole, too successful, but
enthusiasm, hopes, and expectations were all high, and two meetings
on boron fuels and would-be fuels were held in 1951 alone. Some
awfully dubious chemistry was presented at these meetings —the big
breakthroughs in boron chemistry were yet to come —but everybody
had a good time and came home inspired to renewed efforts.
And very soon they had the money to make these efforts. Project
"Zip" was started in 1952, by BuAer of the Navy. It was designed to
carry on from where the Hermes project had left off, and to develop
a high-energy, boron-based fuel for jet engines. This was before the
day of the ICBM's, the long-range bomber-carrying nuclear bombs
was the chosen weapon of deterrence in the cold war, and anything
that would increase the range or the speed of that bomber was very
much to be desired. The major prime contractors, each with multi
million-dollar contracts, were the OIin Mathieson Chemical Corpora
tion and the Gallery Chemical Co., but by the end of the decade many
more organizations, propulsion, chemical, academic —you name it —
had become involved, either as minor prime contractors or as sub
contractors to the primes. By 1956 the program had become so un
wieldy that it had to be split, with the Air Force monitoring Olin
Mathieson's work and the "HEF" program and Navy's BuAer watch
ing over Callery's "Zip." The trade journals played up the Zip and
"Super" fuels (omitting, naturally, the classified chemical details —
which, if published, might give some people pause) and legions of
trusting and avaricious souls went out and bought boron stocks. And,
eventually, lost their shirts.
"Exotics" 123
It soon became evident that in order to attain the desired physical
properties (similar to those of jet fuel) the fuels would have to be
alkyl derivatives of the boranes. In the end, three of these were de
veloped and put into fairly large-scale production. Mathieson's HEF-2
was propyl pentaborane. Callery's HiCal-3, and Mathieson's HEF-3
were mixtures of mono-, di-, and triethyl decaborane, and HiCal-4
and HEF-4 were mixtures of mono-, di-, tri-, and tetramethyl deca
borane. Both -3 and -4 contained traces of unsubstituted decaborane.
(The missing numbers represented the fuels in an intermediate stage
of synthesis.)
The chemistry of the borohydrides was investigated as it had never
been investigated before, process details were worked out on the pilot-
plant level, two full-sized production facilities, one Callery, one
Mathieson, were built and put on stream, handling and safety manuals
were written and published —and the whole thing was done on a
crash basis. Never had one poor element been given such concen
trated attention by so many chemists and chemical engineers.
And then the whole program was brought to a screeching halt.
There were two reasons for this, one strategic, one technical. The
first was the arrival of the ICBM on the scene, and the declining role
of the long-range bomber. The second lay in the fact that the com
bustion product of boron is boron trioxide, B O , and that below
2 3
about 1800° this is either a solid or a glassy, very viscous liquid. And
when you have a turbine spinning at some 4000 rpm, and the clear
ance between the blades is a few thousandths of an inch, and this sticky,
viscous liquid deposits on the blades, the engine is likely to undergo
what the British, with precision, call "catastrophic self-disassembly."
All sorts of efforts were made to reduce the viscosity of the oxide,
but to no avail. The HEF's and the HiCal's just could not be used in a
jet engine. The plants were put on stand-by, and eventually sold for
junk. The Zip program was dead, but the memory lingers.
It was by no means a total fiasco. The small fraction of the total
cost which went for research added more to the corpus of boron
chemistry in ten years than otherwise would have been learned in
fifty.* One of the most interesting discoveries was that of the "Car-
boranes," by Murray Cohen, of Reaction Motors, in 1957. The parent
* Dick Holzmann was at ARPA at the time, and it is due to him that all this chemistry
is available, and not buried forever in the files of the contractors and the services. He
had all the information collected, heckled Ronald Hughes, Ivan Smith, and Ed Lawless
of Midwest Research Institute into putting it together in one volume, and finally edited
Production of the Boranes and Belated Research, which was published by Academic Press
in 1967.
124 Ignition
compound, Bi C H , has the structure of a closed, symmetrical,
0 2 12
icosahedral cage, and it and its derivatives exhibit a surprisingly
high stability against oxidation, hydrolysis, and thermal decomposi
tion. Neff, of Hughes Tool, took advantage of this stability when he
attempted to make a monopropellant based on a carborane derivative.
(See the monopropellant chapter.) Derivatives may also be useful in
high-energy solid propellants, and even, possibly, as high-tempera
ture-resistant plastics.
As far as rocket propulsion itself was concerned, the result of the
Zip program was that there were now large stocks of diborane (the
starting point for the synthesis of all the boranes and their derivatives)
pentaborane, decaborane, and the HEF's and HiCal's available, so that
their usefulness as fuels could be investigated on something more
than the frustrating fifty-pound level. Aerojet, starting about 1959,
worked with HEF-3 and pentaborane, burning them with N O or
2 4
hydrogen peroxide, and Reaction Motors had most of the bugs out of
the pentaborane-peroxide system by 1964. With proper injector de
sign the systems could be made to work, and to yield something close
to their theoretical specific impulse. And the problem of the solid
deposits in the nozzle wasn't too important when the motor was of a
respectable size. It didn't arise at all, of course, when a fluorine oxi
dizer was used. Don Rogillio, at Edwards Air Force Base, in 1962-64
burned pentaborane with NF and with N F , and got quite a good
3 2 4
performance, although, as the combination is a fiendishly hot one, he
had a lot of trouble with burned-out injectors and nozzles.
But once pentaborane was made to work, nobody could find any
particular use for it. The performance was good, yes, but the density
of pentaborane is low —0.618—which militated against its use in a
tactical missile. Further, the (oxygen type) bxidizers with which it
performed best, peroxide and N O , had unacceptable freezing points.
2 4
And if you used nitric acid, you lost a good deal of its performance
advantage. And, of course, with any of these oxidizers, the exhaust
contained large quantities of solid B O , and a conspicuous exhaust
2 3
stream may be undesirable. And if you used a halogen oxidizer, such as
ClF , the performance wasn't enough better than that of a hydrazine
3
to be worth the trouble. And finally, it was still expensive.
The situation was otherwise with diborane. It couldn't be used in a
missile, of course (its boiling point is —92.5°) but might well be used
in certain deep-space applications where its low density (0.433 at the
boiling point) wouldn't matter. Its natural partner was OF (although
2
ONF would also be suitable) and from 1959 to the present that com
3
bination has been under investigation by several agencies, among
"•Exotics" 125
them Reaction Motors, and NASA-Lewis. The combination is a hot
one, and it isn't easy to design injectors and nozzles which will stand
it, but the difficulties are far from insurmountable, and an operational
system does not seem far away. The combination, by the way, is an
unusually hairy one to work with, both propellants being remarkably
poisonous, but rocket men usually know how to stay alive, and it
hasn't killed anybody —yet.
One thing that might have kept pentaborane in the picture was the
advent of BN system, early in 1958. Callery Chemical was the origi
nator of the idea, but within a year every propulsion contractor in the
country, plus JPL, NASA, and EAFB had got into the act.
This is the idea: Boron nitride, BN, is a white, crystalline solid, with
a hexagonal crystal structure like that of graphite.* It is a very stable
molecule, with an exothermic heat of formation of some sixty kilo-
calories per mole. Now, imagine the reaction of a borane with hy
drazine.
B H + N H -» 2BN + 5H
2 6 2 4 2
or
2B H + 5N H -» 10BN + 19H
5 9 2 4 2
The heat of formation of the BN would be the energy source, and the
hydrogen would comprise the working fluid — dragging the solid BN
along with it, of course. Performance calculations indicated that the
pentaborane-hydrazine combination should have the astounding
performance of 326 seconds, and brought out the even more astound
ing fact that the chamber temperature should be only about 2000 K
—1500 K or so, cooler than anything else with that sort of perform
ance. The thought ofastorable combination with a performance above
300 seconds, and with such a manageable chamber temperature sent
every propulsion man in the country into orbit.
Getting enough pentaborane to work with was no problem, of
course, in 1958-59. The Air Force had tons and tons of the stuff,
from their Mathieson operation, and hadn't the foggiest idea of what
to do with it. So it was practically free for the asking, and everybody
leaped into the act, uttering glad cries. Callery, NASA-Lewis, Reac
tion Motors, and EAFB were some of the first to try the combination
— most of them, at first, at approximately the hundred-pound thrust
level.
* Carbon, of course, occurs both as graphite and diamond. And some recent work
indicates that BN can be had, not only with the graphite structure, but with a diamond
like sirut'lure, and as hard, ov harder, than diamond ilself.
126 Ignition
Reaction Motors' experience is typical. Hydrazine/pentaborane was
hypergolic, although ignition was a bit hard. Combustion efficiency
was ghastly, about 85-88 percent C* efficiency.* And specific impulse
efficiency was worse; the engineers considered themselves lucky when
they got 75 percent of the 326 seconds the calculations said they
should get.
Obviously, the combustion efficiency was the first problem to be
tackled, for unless that was brought up to a reasonable figure nothing
could be done about the specific impulse —or anything else.
Part of the difficulty stemmed from the fact —soon discovered —
that the reaction does not go neatly to BN and hydrogen, as the equa
tions say it should. Instead, some of the boron is exhausted as ele
mental boron, and the leftover nitrogen combines with some of the
hydrogen to form ammonia. This, naturally, does not help perform
ance.
Another problem lay in the difficulty of mixing the pentaborane
and the hydrazine so that they could react. Hydrazine is a water-solu
ble substance, and pentaborane is oil-soluble, and the two were re
markably stubborn about getting together. (This led to the BN-mono-
propellant work, described in the monopropellant chapter.) Addi
tives to the propellants were no help — and everything from hydrazine
nitrate to UDMH was tried. To get good mixing you simply have to
use a remarkably sophisticated injector. Love, Jackson, and Haber-
man learned this the hard way, at EAFB, during 1959-60-61. As
their thrust level rose from 100 to 5000 pounds, and they laboriously
dragged their C* efficiency from 76 percent up to 95 percent, they
experimented with no less than thirty different injectors, each one
more sophisticated and complicated than the last.
While this was going on, the problems involved in handling penta
borane were still around —and hairy. It was remarkably poisonous, as
I have mentioned. And it is hypergolic with the atmosphere, and the
fires are brutes to extinguish. If you spray a burning pool of the stuff
with water, the fire goes out eventually —if you're lucky. But then the
remaining unburned pentaborane is covered with a layer of solid bo
ron oxide or perhaps boric acid, which protects it from the air. And
* C*, pronounced "see star," is a measure of combustion efficiency. It is derived by
multiplying the measured chamber pressure by the area of the throat of the nozzle,
and dividing this by the mass flow of the propellants. It comes out in feet per second
or meters per second, depending on the system you,use. Its theoretical value can be
calculated, just as theoretical specific impulse can, and the percentage of theoretical
C* that you measure experimentally is a good measure of the completeness of com
bustion, and of the efficiency of the injector.
"Exotics' 127
if that crust is broken (which is certain to happen), the fire starts all
over again. Even disposing of leftover pentaborane is a problem, but
not one I'll go into here. Holzmann's book tells all about it, if you're
interested.
Considering all this, I asked some of Rocketdyne's people —Rocket-
dyne was working closely with EAFB on their BN work —how they
managed to live with the stuff. "Oh, it's no problem," they answered.
"You just follow the directions in our safety manual!" I asked them
to send me a copy of said manual, and in due time it arrived. It would
be a misstatement to say that it was the size of the Manhattan phone
book, but I've seen a great many municipalities with smaller ones. And
even with the help of the manual, one of their rocket mechanics, a little
later, managed to get himself hospitalized because of pentaborane.
The final step in the BN work was to scale up to a larger motor, of
some 30,000 pounds thrust, and this was done at Edwards during
1961-62-63. (Incidentally, a lot of the work with hazardous propel-
lants has been done at Edwards. It's located in the middle of the
Mojave desert, and you don't have to worry about the neighbors. Even
if you spill a ton of liquid fluorine —and that's been done there, just
to see what would happen —the only thing that's likely to be damaged
is the peace of mind of a few jack rabbits and rattlesnakes.) I saw
movies of some of the test runs, and they were spectacular, with dense
white clouds of solid BN rising two miles into the sky.
The results with the big motor were poor at first —about three-
quarters of the theoretical specific impulse —but they improved with
injector design, and before the end of 1963 the magic 300 seconds
had been reached. (The final injector comprised some six thousand
carefully drilled orifices! It was not cheap to manufacture.) But the
BN system had finally been made to work, and was a success.
The only fly in the ointment was that the system was obsolete at
birth. CIF arrived on the scene just as BN succeeded —and the CIF -
5 5
hydrazine combination performs as well as the hydrazine-penta-
borane system, is much denser, and much easier to handle, works in a
much simpler and cheaper motor, has an invisible exhaust stream —
and is cheaper by at least an order of magnitude. Five years of work
had been a frustrating exercise in expensive futility. Sometimes
rocket men wonder why they ever got into the business.
However, there does seem to be some hope for the BN system, in a
rather specialized application. Aerojet, fairly recently (1966-67) has
been investigating the usability of the combination in a ram rocket,
where the exhausted hydrogen, BN, elemental boron, and ammonia
would be burned by the intake air, to give extra thrust, and has found
128 Ignition
that it works very well indeed in such an arrangement. So perhaps
the Edwards people didn't labor entirely in vain.
The borohydrides were related fuels that never quite made it. Here
a word of explanation seems to be in order. Borohydrides come in
two, or perhaps three types. The first type comprises the alkali metal
borohydrides, LiBH , NaBH , and so on. These are straightforward
4 4
ionic salts —white crystalline solids, with no nonsense about them.
They are reasonably stable —NaBH is almost stable in water —and
4
can be handled easily.
Lithium borohydride, as has been mentioned, was tried as a freez
ing point depressant for hydrazine by Don Armstrong at Aerojet as
early as 1948. He found that the mixture was unstable, but neverthe
less Stan Tannenbaum, at RMI, tried it again in 1958, with the same
results. And then, back at Aerojet, Rosenberg lit on the same mixture
in 1965. And he found that 3 percent of the borohydride decomposed
in 200 days at 69°. All of which gives one a feeling of "this is where I
came in."
Sodium borohydride is much more stable than is the lithium salt,
and its solution in liquid ammonia is quite stable, and Aerojet fired
this, with oxygen, in 1949, but its performance was inferior to that of
hydrazine and the work wasn't followed up. And Patrick McNamara,
at EAFB, fired a hydrazine solution of the sodium salt with chlorine
trifiuoride in 1965, but got a performance inferior to that of pure
hydrazine.
The second type (the "perhaps") includes ammonium and hydra-
zinium borohydride, which can be made in situ in liquid ammonia or
hydrazine, but which would be unstable if isolated at room tempera
ture. Aerojet burned a solution of hydrazinium borohydride in hydra
zine (with oxygen) in 1949. I suspect that the mixture was unstable,
for nothing more ever came of it.
The third type includes the aluminum and beryllium borohydrides,
A1(BH ) and Be(BH ) . These are covalent compounds, with un
4 3 4 2
usual bonding, liquids at room temperature, and violently hypergolic
with air. Nobody has ever had enough beryllium borohydride all
together in one place and at one time for a motor firing, but Arm
strong and Young at Aerojet fired aluminum borohydride with oxy
gen in 1950, and the next year Wilson, also at Aerojet, burned it with
liquid fluorine. The results were not sufficiently encouraging to out
weigh the difficulties involved in handling the fuel, and aluminum
borohydride lay more or less dormant for some ten years.
Then, starting about 1960, Dr. H. W. Schulz and J. N. Hogsett, at
"Exotics 129
Union Carbide, started the development of the "Hybalines." And —
something rare in the propellant business — they did it with company,
not government, money. Aluminum borohydride forms a mole for
mole addition compound —an adduct — with amines. And these ad-
ducts are not spontaneously inflammable in the atmosphere, but with
reasonable precautions, can be handled without any particular diffi
culty.
Schulz and Hogsett experimented with dozens of different amines,
but the fuel they settled on, as having the best combination of proper
ties, was a mixture of the adducts of monomethyl amine and of di-
methylamine. They called it Hybaline A . (They also made some ad
5
ducts of beryllium borohydride. These they called "Hybaline B.")
They plugged the Hybalines for some four years, quoting calculated
performance figures which were a wonder to behold. The only diffi
culty was that they assumed — on the basis of certain very doubtful
experimental figures —a heat of formation for their mixture of ad
ducts which was incompatible with that generally accepted for alumi
num borohydride, and which generated a certain skepticism in their
audiences. The question was finally settled when EAFB made a series
of full-scale (5000 pound thrust) firings with Hybaline A /N 0 .
5 2 4
And got a maximum of 281 seconds, much less than would have been
delivered by, say, ClF and hydrazine. So, by 1964, the Hybalines were
5
finished.
The latest excursion into the realm of the exotic was made by F. C.
Gunderloy, at Rocketdyne. He discovered that certain linear poly
mers of beryllium hydride and dimethyl beryllium., with the chains
terminated with BH groups (since the work is classified, I can't be
3
more specific in describing them) were viscous liquids, and worked
on them for four or five years. The chemistry involved is interesting
for its own sake, but it doesn't appear likely to lead to a useful pro
pellant. The liquids are extremely poisonous, and beryllium oxide,
which would be one of the exhaust products if one of them were used
as a fuel, is so toxic as to rule out any use in a tactical missile; and there
are better fuels for space work. Setting to one side the problems of
working with a high-viscosity propellant, beryllium is a comparatively
rare and quite expensive material, and there appear to be better uses
for it. The development of these compounds would have been an
admirable academic exercise well worth several PhD's in inorganic
chemistry. As a propellant development program it can be classified
only as an unfortunate waste of the taxpayer's money.
So what's ahead for the "exotics?" As I see it, just two things.
130 Ignition
1. Diborane will probably be useful in deep space work.
2. The pentaborane/hydrazine, BN system should be very good in
ram-rocket and similar systems.
And the people who lost their shirts on boron stocks will have to
discover a better way of getting rich from other people's work. For
them, my heart does not bleed.
11
The Hopeful Monoprops
Monopropellants, unlike Gaul, are divided into two parts. Low-energy
monoprops are used for auxiliary power on a missile, sometimes for
attitude control on a space vehicle (the Mercury capsules, and the
X-15 airplane at high altitudes used hydrogen peroxide for attitude
control) for tank pressurization and the like. High-energy monoprops,
the glamour boys, are intended to compete with bi-propellants for
main propulsion.
There haven't been too many of the first sort, and their develop
ment has been more or less straightforward. The first, of course, was
hydrogen peroxide, used by Von Braun to drive the turbines of the
A-4. He used a solution of calcium permanganate to catalyze its de
composition, but later workers at Buffalo Electrochemical Co.
(BECCO) found it more convenient to use a silver screen, coated with
samarium oxide to do the job. (I'm not sure whether samarium was
chosen as a result of a systematic investigation of all of the rare-earth
metals, or because the investigator had some samarium nitrate in his
stock room.) The leaders in this work were the people at RMI, who
were investigating peroxide, at the same time, as the oxidizer for a
"super-performance" engine on a fighter plane. They had one inter
esting monopropellant application OfH O very much on their minds.
2 2
This was the ROR, or "Rocket on Rotor" concept, by which a very
small — perhaps fifty pounds thrust — peroxide motor was mounted
on the tip of each rotor blade of a helicopter. The propellant tank was
to be in the hub of the rotor, and centrifugal force would take care
of the feed pressure. The idea was to improve the performance of the
132 Ignition
chopper, particularly when it had to lift off in a hurry. (That means
when somebody is shooting at you.) The work on this went on from
1952 to 1957, and was a spectacular success. I've seen an ROR heli
copter operating, and when the pilot cut in his rockets the beast shot
up into the air like a goosed archangel. The project was dropped, for
some reason, which seems a shame. An ROR chopper would have been
awfully helpful in Vietnam, where somebody usually is shooting at
you.
At any rate, peroxide is still used as a low-energy monopropellant,
and will probably continue to be used in applications where its high
freezing point isn't a disadvantage.
One such application is as a propellant for torpedoes. (After all, the
ocean is a pretty good thermostat!) Here it is decomposed to oxygen
and superheated steam, the hot gases spin the turbines which operate
the propellers, and the torpedo is on its way. But here a little com
plication sets in. If you're firing at a surface ship, the oxygen in the
turbine exhaust will bubble to the surface, leaving a nice visible wake,
which not only gives the intended victim a chance to dodge, but also
tells him where you are. BECCO came up with an ingenious solution
in 1954. They added enough tetrahydrofuran or diethylene glycol
(other fuels could have been used) to the peroxide to use up the oxy
gen, letting the reaction go stoichiometrically to water and carbon di
oxide. The water (steam) is naturally no problem, and CO , as any
2
body knows who's ever opened a can of beer, will dissolve in water
with the help of a little pressure. That solved the wake problem, but
made the stuff fearfully explosive, and brought the combustion tem
perature up to a level which would take out the turbine blades. So
BECCO added enough water to the mixture to bring the chamber
temperature down to 180O0F, which the turbine blades could tolerate,
and the water dilution reduced the explosion hazard to an acceptable
level.
Another low-energy monopropellant was propyl nitrate, first in
vestigated around 1949 or 1950. It was plugged, enthusiastically, in
England by Imperial Chemical Industries, who insisted that it was ab
solutely harmless and non-explosive. Ha! ERDE (WaItham Abbey) in
vestigated it and its homologues rather extensively, and in this coun
try the Ethyl Corporation and Wyandotte Chemical Co. did the same.
The work in England was done on isopropyl nitrate, but in this coun
try, due to a magnificently complicated patent situation, normal
propyl nitrate was the isomer used. By 1956, not only Ethyl and
Wyandotte, but United Aircraft, JPL, NOTS, Aerojet and the Naval
Underwater Ordnance Station (the old Torpedo Station at Newport)
The Hopeful Monoprops 133
were working with it, either as an auxiliary power source or as a tor
pedo propellant, and either straight or mixed with ethyl nitrate. It
was easy to start—either a hot glow bar or a slug of oxygen and a spark
plug were enough — burned clean and smoothly, and seemed to be the
answer to a lot of problems.
And then it showed its teeth. NPN doesn't go off on the card-gap
tester. You can throw it around, kick it, put bullets through it, and
nothing happens. But if there is a tiny bubble of gas in it, and that
bubble is compressed rapidly —possibly by a water-hammer effect
when a valve is closed suddenly —it will detonate —violently. This is
known as "sensitivity to adiabatic compression," and in this respect it
is at least as touchy as nitroglycerine. It was at Newport that it hap
pened. Somebody closed a valve suddenly, the NPN let go, and the
explosion not only did a lot of damage but convinced most rocket
people that monopropellant was not for them.
Another low-energy monopropellant that got quite a play starting
about 1950 was ethylene oxide, C H O. It's commercially available,
2 4
cheaply and in quantity, since it's an important chemical intermediate.
It's easy to start —a sparkplug is enough to do it —and decomposes
in the reactor to, primarily, methane and carbon monoxide. It has a
tendency, however, to deposit coke in the reactor, to an extent which
depends upon the nature of the surface of the latter. This effect can
be prevented by lining the chamber with silver —the flame tempera
ture is very low —or by adding a sulfur containing compound to the
propellant. It is also likely to polymerize in storage, forming gummy
polyethylene ethers, which plug up everything. Sunstrand Machine
Tool worked with it for several years, using it very successfully to
drive a turbine. Experiment Incorporated, "Walter Kidde, and Wyan
dotte Chemical also investigated it, and Forrestal Laboratory, at
Princeton, tried it as the fuel of a ram-rocket during 1954 and 1955.
Some work was done on acetylenics, such as methyl acetylene and
di-isopropenyl acetylene, by Experiment Incorporated, by Air Reduc
tion, and by Wyandotte between 1951 and 1955 but these were never
successful as monopropellants — too much coking, even if they didn't
decide to detonate.
A monopropellant with better staying power was hydrazine. Louis
Dunn, at JPL, investigated it in 1948-51, and it's still with us. It can
decompose either to hydrogen and nitrogen, or to ammonia and
nitrogen, and the relative importance of the two reactions depends
on any number of things: the chamber pressure, catalytic effects, the
stay-time of the gases in the chamber, and so on. The reaction is best
started by flowing the hydrazine through a catalyst bed into the com-
134 Ignition
bustion chamber. Grant, at JPL, in 1953, came up with the first rea
sonably satisfactory catalyst: iron, cobalt, and nickel oxides deposited
on a refractory substrate. The decomposing hydrazine, of course,
reduces the oxides to the finely divided metals, which take over the
catalytic role after startup. But restarts, if the catalyst bed has cooled,
are just about impossible. The Shell Development Company, in recent
years (1962 to 1964) has brought out a catalyst which allows restarts —
iridium metal deposited on the substrate. But nobody is really happy
with it. It's easy to "drown" the catalyst bed by trying to run too much
propellant through it, so that you get imcomplete decomposition or
none at all, and it works very poorly with the substituted hydrazines,
which you have to use for low temperature applications. On top of
that, iridium is the rarest of the platinum metals and the catalyst is
horribly expensive. And just to make it interesting, the major supplier
of iridium is the Soviet Union.
Another way to get restarts is to use a "thermal" instead of a cata
lytic bed. This has a high heat capacity and is insulated against heat
loss, so that it will stay hot for some time after shutdown, and will
reignite the propellant on restart simply by heating it. For the original
start, the bed is impregnated with iodine pentoxide, I O , or with
2 5
iodic acid, HIO , either of which are hypergolic with hydrazine. But
3
if the period between shutdown and restart is too long ! All that we
can say now is that a satisfactory technique for starting hydrazine
decomposition is yet to be developed. It's still unfinished business.
During the ten years after World War II, a respectable amount of
monopropellant work was going on in England. Not only were the
British very much interested in peroxide (both as an oxidizer and as a
monopropellant), and in propyl nitrate and its relatives, they were
also intrigued with the idea of a monopropellant which could compete
with bi-propellants for main propulsion. As early as 1945 they fired
the German 80/20 mixture of methyl nitrate and methanol, and came
Io the regretful conclusion that it was something that just couldn't be
lived with, in spite of its respectable performance.
Then the Waltham Abbey people came up with another idea. The
"Dithekites" had been developed during the war as liquid explosives,
and ERDE thought that they might possibly be good monopropel-
lants. The Dithekites are mixtures comprising one mole of nitro
benzene and five of nitric acid (which makes the mixture stoichio
metric to water and CO ) and a varying percentage of water. D-20
2
contains 20 percent water. Even with the added water, the mixtures
weren't too stable, and the nitrobenzene had a tendency to get
nitrated further. But the British tend to be more casual (or braver)
The Hopeful Monoprops 135
about such things than we are in this country, and that didn't deter
them appreciably. Nor did another hazard, peculiar to the Dithekites.
They are, of course corrosive, and very rough on the human skin,
and to make it worse, the highly poisonous nitrobenzene was absorbed
rapidly through the damaged tissue into the anatomy of the victim,
subjecting him, as it were, to a one-two punch. However, they per
severed and fired the things more or less successfully in 1949-50,
only to discover that if you put enough water into them to keep them
from blowing your head off the performance you got wasn't worth the
trouble. End of Dithekites.
Another type of monopropellant that they investigated about this
time (1947-48) was based on a mixture of ammonium nitrate and a
fuel dissolved in water. A typical mixture was AN-I, consisting of
Ammonium nitrate 26 percent
Methyl ammonium nitrate 50 percent
Ammonium dichromate 3 percent
(combustion catalyst)
Water 21 percent
Their performance, unfortunately, was so bad that development was
dropped.
In this country, up to 1954, there were two main lines of high
energy monopropellant development. One stemmed from the efforts,
described in Chapter 3, to reduce the freezing point of hydrazine.
As has been related, JPL and NOTS, between 1948 and 1954, had
examined mixtures of hydrazine and hydrazine nitrate with a thor
oughness which left little to be desired. And it was obvious, of course,
that a mixture of hydrazine and hydrazine nitrate would have a better
monopropellant performance than straight hydrazine. And when it
was tried, which it was by 1950, it was discovered that the obvious was
indeed true. There was only one catch. Any mixture which contained
enough hydrazine nitrate and little enough water to have a respectable
performance was more likely than not to detonate with little or no
provocation. So that was not the route to a high energy monopropel
lant.*
* But it seemed to be the way to a liquid gun propellant. Even a low-energy monopro
pellant has more energy in it per gram than does smokeless ball powder, and a great
deal more energy per cubic centimeter. (A liquid is much more closely packed than a
heap of small grains.) So, if a liquid propellant were used, either packaged in the
cartridge as the solid propellant is, or pumped separately into the gun chamber behind
the bullet, it should be possible to get a much higher muzzle velocity without any
increase in weight. Hydrazine-hydrazine nitrate-water mixtures have been the usual
136 Ignition
Some years later, in the late 50's, Commercial Solvents, working
with their own money (which is unusual in the propellant business),
and in considerable ignorance of what had been done already (which
is not unusual in the propellant business) devised a series of mono-
propellants which were rather similar to the hydrazine mixtures,
except that they were based on methyl amine, to which was added
ammonium nitrate or hydrazine nitrate or methylammonium nitrate,
or lithium nitrate. These were safe enough, but their energy and per
formance were low.
The other line of high-energy monopropellant work in this country
was the development of nitromethane. By 1945, EES, JPL, and Aero
jet had worked with it, and had discovered that it could be more or
less desensitized by the addition of 8 percent of butanol. JPL did some
work with it—finding the optimum injector and chamber design and
so on —right after the war, and in 1949 J. D. Thackerey at Aerojet
started an intensive study that carried on through 1953. And there
was plenty to study!
Ignition was a big problem; it isn't, easy to get the stuff going. Aero
jet found that you couldn't ignite it with a spark unless a stream of
oxygen was introduced at the same time. An ordinary pyrotechnic
igniter was useless; it had to be one of the thermite type. One esoteric
starting technique they developed was to spray a liquid sodium-po
tassium alloy into the chamber at startup. That reacted with the nitro
methane with sufficient enthusiasm to get things going —but it's not
the easiest substance in the world to handle.
Stable and efficient combustion in a reasonably small chamber was
another big problem. Aerojet tried dozens of combustion catalyst ad
ditives, including such surprising things as uranyl perchlorate, and
finally settled on chromium acetylacetonate.
Other additives were tried, to reduce the freezing point and to de
sensitize the propellant, among them nitroethane and ethylene oxide.
They found that the addition of amines, such as aniline, immensely
increased the sensitivity, and Fritz Zwicky patented that as an inven
tion in the field of explosives. The final mixture on which they settled
propellants in the liquid gun programs, although- NPN sometimes mixed with ethyl
nitrate, has been used at times. These programs have been running, on and off, since
about 1950, but have never been carried through. The military demands a weapon,
programs are started and run for a few years, then money or interest runs out, and the
whole thing ends, only to start all over five or six years later. I've seen three cycles
since I got into the business. JPL, Olin Mathieson, Detroit Controls, as well as various
Army and Air Force installations, have been involved. The main problems are more in
the engineering than in the chemistry.
The Hopeful Monoprops 137
comprised 79 percent nitromethane, 19 percent ethylene oxide, and
2 percent chromium acetyl acetonate. They gave it the depressing
name of "Neofuel."
Martin and Laurie had been doing similar work for the Canadian
Defense Establishment in 1950. Their approach was to try to upgrade
the performance of nitromethane or nitroethane or other nitro-al-
kyls by mixing in a suitable amount of WFNA. (Note the similarity to
the Dithekites.) The performance was improved (nitroethane turned
out to be the best nitro-alkyl base to start with) but the sensitivity of
the mixture made it impossible to live with.
So, in the spring of 1954, the only reasonably high-energy mono-
propellant that could be used with reasonable safety was Aerojet's
"Neofuel." And monopropellant research seemed to be at a dead end.
Then it happened. Tom Rice, at the Naval Research Laboratory,
had an idea. He knew that pyridine was extremely resistant to nitra
tion. So, he reasoned that if it were dissolved in WFNA it would prob
ably go to pyridinium nitrate rather than a nitro compound, and then,
as the salt, should be quite stable in the acid. And, by varying the
amount of pyridine in the acid, he could get any oxidizer-fuel ratio
he wanted in the mixture —and should have himself a high energy
monopropellant. He tried mixing the pyridine with the acid, got some
hissing and sputtering but no violent reaction, and had confirmed his
first hypothesis. Then he burned some of his mixture in a liquid strand
burner,* and found that it would burn as a monopropellant. He didn't
go any further at that time, since he didn't have access to a test stand.
Paul Terlizzi, my then boss, had been visiting NOL, and told me
what Tom was doing, just as a piece of gossip. I instantly saw the pos
sibilities, and something else that Paul and, apparently, Tom hadn't
thought of. Which was that almost any amine, and not just extremely
stable ones like pyridine, could be made into a monopropellant, if its
nitrate salt were made first and then dissolved in the acid. And God
only knows how many amines there are!
I made a few crude performance calculations, and found that tri-
* A liquid strand burner is a gadget which will give you some idea of the burning
rate of a monopropellant. It is a pressurized container (bomb), usually with a window.
The monopropellant is burned in a narrow (a few millimeters diameter) vertical glass
tube. If the tube is not too wide, the propellant will burn straight down like a cigarette,
and the rate can be observed and measured. The bomb is pressurized with nitrogen,
to pressures similar'to those in a rocket combustion chamber, and the burning rate is
measured as a function of pressure. It was developed from the strand burner used for
solid propellants. Dr. A. G. Whittaker, at NOTS, burned, among other things, a mix
ture of nitric acid and 2 nitropropane,. He was the first to make much use of it. That
was in the early 50's.
138 Ignition
methylamine should give a performance somewhat better than that
of pyridine. Then I had the gang make a small sample of pyridinium
nitrate, and another of trimethylammonium nitrate, and mix them
up into propellants. This was no trouble— the salts crystallized nicely,
and dissolved in the acid with no fuss. We took a preliminary look at
the mixtures, and liked what we saw. And then I sat down and wrote
a letter to the Rocket Branch in BuAer, asking that I be authorized
to look into the whole business. This was early in June, 1954.1 should,
of course, have waited for official authorization before I did anything
more, but as there didn't seem to be any particular reason to observe
the legalities, we decided to get going immediately, and to make up a
hundred or so pounds of each salt before anybody got around to tell
ing us not to. We had a lot of pyridine around the place, and, for scwffe
unknown reason, a tank of liquefied trimethylamine. Plus, of course,
unlimited nitric acid, so things went fast.
Making the pyridinium nitrate was easy: Just dissolve the pyridine
in water, neutralize with nitric acid, boil off most of the water and
crystallize. (But once, during the boiling down process, something
went wrong, the mixture started to turn brown and evolve ominous
NO fumes, and the whole thing had to be carried hurriedly outdoors
2
and flooded down with a hose!) When we had the dry salt, we dis
solved it in the acid in the proportions which would give the best per
formance, and sent a sample of the mixture down to Tom Rice to try
on his strand burner. It burned better and faster than his had. We
investigated the discrepancy, and found that his WFNA had more
water in it than ours did.
We named the stuff "Penelope" because we'd been waiting so long
lor something like it. (Of course, in the original, Penelope did the
waiting, but we weren't inclined to be fussy about details.)
The trimethylammonium nitrate went just as easily — except for
one small detail. The highly volatile trimethylamine sticks tenaciously
to the skin and clothes, and smells like the Fulton Street fish market
on a hot Saturday morning (although some of us used a more earthy
comparison) and poor Roger Machinist, who had the job of making
the salt, was saluted, for some weeks, by people who held their noses
with one hand, pointed at him with the other, and shouted, "Unclean,
unclean!" We called that propellant "Minnie," for reasons which now
escape me.
We finally got the authorizing letter from the Rocket Branch at the
beginning of September 1954. They insisted that we concentrate our
efforts, at first, on the pyridine mixture, so we made up a large batch
The Hopeful Monoprops 139
of Penelope and turned it over to the hardware boys to see what they
could do with it.
At this precise juncture Hurricane Hazel dropped the biggest oak
tree in New Jersey on me and my MG. We were both out of action for
some time and when 1 got back to work (with a jaw still held together
with baling wire) I learned what had happened.
It seems that the engineers had taken a small motor —about fifty
pounds thrust — fitted it with a monopropellant injector, and mounted
it horizontally on the test stand. They then stuck a pyrotechnic igniter
into the nozzle, started it going, and opened the propellant valve. The
propellant promptly extinguished the igniter. Two more trials gave
the same results. Bert Abramson, who was in charge of the test work,
then took an acetylene torch and heated the motor red hot, and
opened the prop valve. This time he got ignition, and some half
hearted operation for a few seconds. Inspired to further effort, he
crammed about a yard of lithium wire into the chamber, and pushed
the button.
Penelope sprayed into the chamber, collected in a puddle in the
bottom, and then reacted with the wire. The nozzle couldn't cope
with all the gas produced, the chamber pressure rose exponentially,
and the reaction changed to a high order detonation which demol
ished the motor, propagated through the fuel line to the propellant
tank, detonated the propellant there (fortunately there were only a
few pounds in the tank) and wrecked just about everything in the test
cell. Penelope should have been named Xantippe. She also scared
everybody to death — particularly Abramson.
There next occurred what might be called an agonizing reappraisal.
It took some months, and then we decided to do what we should have
done in the first place. I ordered samples of every reasonably simple
amine that I could find on the market, from monomethyl amine to
tri hexyl amine. Plus several unsaturated amines, a few aromatics,
and some pyridine derivatives.
As soon as the first samples came in I put the gang onto the job of
making the amine nitrate salts, which were then made into propel-
lants. At times there would be half a dozen different flasks in the lab
each with a different nitrate in it, and all bubbling away at the same
time.
That was the case once, when we were all seated around the table
in the middle of the lab, having lunch. I glanced up, and noticed that
the contents of one flask was turning a little brown. "Who owns that
one?" I asked (every man was making a different salt), "Better watch
140 Ignition
it!" One of them started to get up. The contents of the flask frothed
up and then settled, frothed up and settled again, just like a man
about to sneeze. I said "Hit the deck!" I got instant obedience when I
used that tone, and seven heads met with a crash under the table as
the flask and its contents went "Whoosh!" across the top of it. No
damage except to the ego of the chemist concerned. But sometimes
I wonder how I managed to run that shop for seventeen years without
a time-lost accident.
Some of the nitrates couldn't be made into propellants, but would
start to react and heat up rapidly when they were mixed with the acid.
The unsaturated amines acted this way, as did some of those with long
chains, such as the hexyl amines. These were diluted with water and
dumped in a hurry. Once we had to call the fire department to do it
for us.
The salts varied madly in their physical properties. Some crys
tallized nicely; others refused to crystallize under any circumstances,
and the solution had to be evaporated to dryness over a steam bath,
coming out as a fine powder. And some were liquids, even perfectly
dry and at room temperature. Monoethylammonium nitrate was one
of these —a clear, viscous, slightly greenish liquid. Molten salts are
nothing new, but these were the only ones I ever heard of that were
liquid at 25°C. I've never found a use for the ethylamine compound,
but something with such interesting properties ought to be good for
something!
But most of them dissolved in the acid without any fuss. I had them
made up to X = 1.00 (stoichiometric to CO and H O), since I ex
2 2
pected their sensitivity to be at a maximum at that mixture ratio, and
had them card gapped. (We had acquired an old destroyer gun
turret —there were dozens of them lying around the place —and set
up a card-gap test rig inside it. The idea of the turret was to contain
the fragments from the cup holding the test specimen, and to make it
possible to find the witness plate after firing.) A goof-off ensign that
1 was stuck with was supposedly in charge of the card-gap work, but
John Szoke, my madly industrious technician, and one of the best
men I've ever seen in a lab, did most of the work. And it was a lot of
work.
Altogether, he card-gapped about forty different mixtures during
that session — and if you can nail down the go-no go point of a single
one in less than a dozen shots, you're lucky.
The results of the tests were surprising. First, Penelope and her
relatives (derived from pyridine and related compounds) were among
I he most sensitive of all the mixtures tried —one of them rated some
The Hopeful Monoprops 141
140 cards. Second, the propellant made from trimethylamine (the
one that I'd wanted to try in the first place) was remarkably insensi
tive—rating about ten cards. And, as the amine samples came in from
the manufacturers, a fascinating pattern started to emerge. If you
disregarded things like methylcyclohexyl amine, which didn't seem
to follow any rules, and considered only those propellants made from
straight or branched chain aliphatic amines, the card gap sensitivity
appeared to be a powerful function of the structure of the molecule.
The longer the chain, the more sensitive was the propellant mixture.
A propellant made from propylamine was more sensitive than one
made form ethyl amine, and one made from tripropylamine was more
sensitive than one made from dipropylamine, which, in turn, was
more sensitive than the one made from monopropylamine. And one
made from isopropylamine was less sensitive than the normal propyl
amine mixture.
To say that the explanation of these regularities was not obvious
would be to understate the matter. But I proceeded in the way a scien
tist usually does when he's confronted with a mass of apparently in
explicable numerical data. I worked out an empirical equation relat
ing the card-gap sensitivity to a function, <p, which I called "flop-
piness coefficient," and calculated from the number of carbon chains
in the ammonium ion, their lengths, and their degree of branching.
(In deriving it, I had to use logarithms to the base three, which is some
thing so weird as to be unheard of. Fortunately they canceled out,
and didn't appear in the final function!) And from this equation,
with the help of the specific heat of the propellant, the size of the
ammonium ion, and a few assumptions, I was able to make a guess at
the heat of activation or the explosion process. It came out at quite a
reasonable figure —some 20 to 30 kilocalories/mole — right in the
range of the strength of molecular bonds.
This was interesting, but what was more to the point, my list of
candidate propellants was drastically pruned. Starting with thirty-
three mixtures, and taking thirty-five cards as an arbitrary sensitivity
limit, I had only ten survivors. Some of these I dropped immediately,
because the freezing point of the mixture, when made up to the opti
mum mixture ratio, was too high, or because the dry salt was unstable
in storage, or because it was much more expensive than another
compound with the same sensitivity.
The final selection was based on thermal stability. Some of the mix
tures could be evaporated to the dry crystals over a steam bath, but
others, when the acid was almost all gone, would ignite and burn mer
rily. This was some indication of the relative stability of the propel-
142 Ignition
lants, but for more formal —and quantitative — work, we designed and
had built a thermal stability tester. This was a small, sealed, stainless
steel bomb, with a total volume of approximately 10 cc, equipped with
a pressure pickup and a recorder, and with a rupture (or burst) disc
failing at approximately 300 psi. The bomb was loaded with 5 cc of
propellant and placed in a constant temperature bath, and the pres
sure buildup was recorded. There was an open "chimney" above the
burst disc, which extended above the liquid level of the bath, so that
when the disc let go the bath liquid, which was usually old cylinder
oil, wouldn't be spread all over the landscape.
In a typical run, a sample was placed in the bath at 100°. In a very
few minutes the pressure rose to about 100 psi, and stayed there for
about fifteen hours. Then, it started to increase at an accelerating rate,
and the burst disc failed at seventeen hours. When we ran a series of
runs, at different temperatures, and then plotted the logarithm of the
time-to-burst against the reciprocal of the absolute temperature, we
got a gratifyingly straight line, from whose slope it was easy to cal
culate the heat of activation of the decomposition process. (It turned
out to be surprisingly close to that derived from the card gap work!)
Anyhow, we found that, other things being more or less equal, sec
ondary amine mixtures were more stable than primary amine mix
tures, and that tertiary amine mixtures were the most unstable of all.
And of the propellants which had survived our other screenings, that
made from diisopropyl amine had the best thermal stability. So it was
Isolde. (It was our custom, by this time, to give our monoprops fem
inine names —like hurricanes. Sometimes the name was vaguely mne
monic of the amine involved —as Beulah. for a butyl amine, for in
stance—and sometimes it had nothing to do with anything. Roger
Machinist had been the one to make diisopropylammonium nitrate,
and hence had the inalienable right to name it. And he'd been to the
opera the night before.)
That was OK with us. Isolde salt was easy to make, crystallized
nicely, and was, in general, a joy to work with.
In the meantime, we'd been trying to invent some way of igniting
it without blowing up the motor. That wasn't easy. You couldn't set
fire to the propellant in the open, even with an oxygen-propane torch.
Ordinary pyrotechnic squibs, as we already knew, were useless in a
motor. We tried to make some really hot igniters by mixing up pow
dered aluminum or magnesium, potassium nitrate or perchlorate,
and epoxy cement, letting the mess harden in a polyethylene tube,
and then cutting off the tube. The results were spectacular. When we
lit one of them off (we did it with an electrically heated wire) we got
The Hopeful Monoprops 143
a brilliant white flame, clouds of white smoke, and all sorts of sound
effects. We tried them out just outside of the door of the lab, and al
ways had one ready to greet any incautious safety man as he was stroll
ing by. Bert Abramson came in for a demonstration, and when one
of them was touched off he tried to extinguish it with a wash bottle.
Whereupon the igniter broke in two, with the business end dropping
to the floor and chasing him about the lab as everybody cheered. But
they wouldn't do the job —a stream of Isolde would put out the fire.
Apparently it just wasn't practical to light the stuff off with an ex
ternal energy source. It would have to produce its own energy, which
meant that we had to develop some source of hypergolic ignition. We
didn't want to bother with the plumbing that would be involved if we
used a slug of UDMH for instance, to react with the acid in the pro-
pellant; that would lead to too much complication. What we wanted
was some solid material, which could be placed in the chamber before
hand, and would react with the propellant when it was injected to start
the fire going. We tried all sorts of things — powdered magnesium,
metallic sodium, and what not. (The candidate was placed in a hor
izontal one- or two-inch diameter glass tube, the propellant was
sprayed in at one end, and the results were monitored with a high
speed camera.) We had no luck for some time, but then we finally hit
on a highly improbable mixture that worked — a mixture of lithium
hydride and rubber cement. This unlikely sounding mixture was
made into a thick dough, spread on a sheet of gauze, and then
wrapped around a wooden dowel. The end of the dowel was tapered
and screwed into a plug tapped with a Vs" pipe thread. The plug, in
turn, was screwed into an appropriately threaded hole in the center
of the injector, so that when the propellant was injected it would im
pinge upon, and react with the ignition mixture. The whole device,
some six inches long, was kept in a sealed test tube until it was needed,
to protect the LiH from atmospheric moisture. The business end of
it was a ghastly corpse-gray, and it was the most obscene looking ob
ject I have ever seen — and the rocket mechanics christened it accord
ingly.*
But it worked. We had our first successful run in January 1956, and
by April we had a smooth-running and workable system. We got the
* Since the propellant was named "Isolde" it seemed only reasonable to call the ig
niter "Tristan." Then somebody pointed out that the missile using the system would
naturally be called the "King Mark." But when somebody else added that the advanced
model of the missile would of course be the "King Mark II" the engineering officer
started muttering wistfully about flogging at the gratings, keel-hauling, and the uses
of yardarms, and the "Tristan" idea died an untimely death.
144 Ignition
best results with a propellant made up with anhydrous nitric acid
rather than with ordinary WFNA, and with a salt/acid mixture that
gave a A (the ratio of reducing to oxidizing valences in the propellant)
of 1.2. So we called it Isolde 120 A (the 120 referring to the mixture
ratio and the A to the anhydrous acid) and wrote our reports. And
we had something to report —the highest performing monopropel-
lant ever fired anywhere by anybody. Combustion was good — we got
close to 95 percent of the theoretical performance with a surprisingly
small chamber — and we didn't need a fancy (and expensive) injector.
In fact, the one we used was made from six commercially available
oil-burner spray nozzles costing seventy-five cents each.
Our reports (mine on the development of the propellant and the
igniter, methods of analyzing the propellant, card-gap results and so
on, and the engineering report on the motor work) came out together
in November 1956, but everybody in the business had a pretty good
idea of what we had done by June. And then all hell broke loose.
Everybody and his uncle wanted a piece of the action, and wrote
a proposal to one of the three services, for a research program on
monopropellants. RMI, right next door to us, and intimately ac
quainted with our work, was first off the mark, in March 1956, when
they got a Navy contract to develop "Superior Liquid Monopropel
lants," but the others weren't far behind. Wyandotte Chemical had a
Navy contract by September, Phillips Petroleum and Stauffer Chemical
got into the act early in 1957, and by 1958 Pennsalt, Midwest Re
search, Aerojet, and Hughes Tool had joined them. In addition to
these, all of whom were trying to brew up new propellants, several
organizations, including GE, were motor-testing propellants that
others had developed, and were trying to apply them to tactical sys
tems. It was a busy time.
Reaction Motors (before long they had not only a Navy monopro-
pellant program, but an Army contract as well) tried two approaches.
One was to dissolve a fuel in an oxidizer, and the other was to produce
a single-compound propellant, the nitrate or the nitramine of an
energetic radical. Propargyl nitrate, propargyl nitramine, glycidyl
nitrate, 1,4 dinitrato 2 butyne, and 1,6 dinitrato 2,4 hexadyne are
typical of the monstrosities they produced. (Reading the names is
enough to dampen a propellant man's brow!)
I don't believe that they ever made enough of any of them to do a
card-gap, but the results of certain other tests were enough to make
one a bit cautious. Joe Pisani phoned me from RMI one day late in
1958, asking me if I'd do a thermal stability run on a sample of pro
pargyl nitrate. I replied that I'd be glad to, but that he'd have to re-
The Hopeful Monoprops 145
place anything that got busted, since I didn't trust the stuff. So he sent
his sample up to us. It was only 3 cc (we usually used 5) but maybe we
were lucky at that. John Szoke heated the oil bath up to 1600C (the
temperature that we used then for routine tests) loaded the sample
into the bomb, lowered the bomb into the bath, and scurried back into
the lab, closing the door behind him. (For obvious reasons, the setup
was outdoors and not in the lab.) He turned on the recorder and
watched. Nothing happened for a while. The pressure rose slowly as
the sample warmed up, and then seemed to stabilize.
And then it let go, with an ear-splitting detonation. Through the
safety glass window we saw a huge red flare as the oil flashed into
flame, only to quench immediately as it hit the ice-cold concrete. We
cut everything off, and went out to survey the damage. The bomb had
fragmented; the burst disc just couldn't rupture fast enough. The
pressure pickup was wrecked, as was the stirrer. The cylindrical
stainless steel pot which had held the oil had been reshaped into some
thing that would have looked well under a bed. And the oil —it had
been old vacuum pump oil, black and filthy. It had hit the concrete
floor of the test area, the wall of the building, and everything else in
reach, and had cleverly converted itself (the temperature was well
below freezing) into something resembling road tar. I got on the
phone.
"Joe? You know that stuff you sent me to test for thermal stability?
Well, first, it hasn't got any. Second, you owe me a new bomb, a new
Wianco pickup, a new stirrer, and maybe a few more things I'll think
of later. And third (crescendo and fortissimo) you'll have a couple of
flunkies up here within fifteen minutes to clean up this ( — bleep — )
mess or I'll be down there with a rusty hacksaw blade. ..." I specified
the anatomical use to which the saw blade would be put. End of
conversation.
And it was the end of the propargyls and their relatives. Washing
ton told Reaction to forget that foolishness and start working on the
N-F compounds instead. That story will be told a little later.
The other approach to a monopropellant at RMI was taken by Stan
Tannenbaum, who tried mixtures of inert (he hoped) oxidizers and
fuels. This was bathtub chemistry, involving littie or no synthesis,
but requiring strong nerves. It had the advantage, of course, that the
stoichiometry could be adjusted ad lib, and wasn't constrained, as in
the one-component monoprops, by the nature of the molecule. And
the idea wasn't exactly new. The French, during World War I, had
employed aerial bombs filled with a mixture of N O and benzene.
2 4
(The stuff was so touchy that the two liquids weren't mixed together
146 Ignition
until the bomb had been dropped from the plane!) And, incidentally,
some years before I got into the monopropellant business, a hopeful
inventor had tried to sell me this same mixture for a monoprop,
averring that it was as harmless as mother's milk. I didn't buy it.
Stan worked with N O and with perchloryl fluoride. He found that
2 4
he could mix bicyclooctane or decalin in N O without immediate
2 4
disaster, but that the mixture was too touchy to live with. He tried
tetramethyl silane too, in the hope (unrealized) that it would be
safer, but finally and regretfully came to the conclusion, late in 1959,
that you could not make a practical monopropellant based on N O .
2 4
Howard Bost, at Phillips Petroleum, who had been working with
mixtures of N O and neopentane or 2,2 dinitropropane, came to the
2 4
same conclusion at about the same time. And if a'ny more evidence
were needed, the card-gap values for various N 0 -hydrocarbon mix
2 4
tures, as determined by McGonnigle of Allied Chemical, furnished it.
N 0 -fueI mixtures are not useful monoprops.
2 4
He didn't have anymore luck with perchloryl fluoride. He tried
first mixing it with amines, but found that if they dissolved at all they
immediately reacted with the oxidizer. He could dissolve hydrocarbons
or ethers, but the mixtures were touchy and too dangerous to handle.
(The same discovery was made at GE, when a mixture of perchloryl
fluoride and propane detonated, seriously injuring the operator.)
So that approach, too, was hopeless. Nor was it a good idea to try to
mix N F with monomethyl hydrazine, as he discovered early in
2 4
1959!
If Tannenbaum's mixtures were bad, that proposed at a mono
propellant conference in October 1957 by an optimist from Air
Products, Inc., was enough to raise the hair on the head of anybody in
the propellant business. He suggested that a mixture of liquid oxygen
and liquid methane would be an extra high-energy monopropellant,
and had even worked out the phase diagrams of the system.* How
he avoided suicide (the first rule in handling liquid oxygen is that you
never, never let it come in contact with a potential fuel) is an interesting
question, particularly as JPL later demonstrated that you could make
the mixture detonate merely by shining a bright light on it. Never
theless, ten years later I read an article seriously proposing an oxy
gen-methane monopropellant! Apparently junior engineers are
allergic to the history of their own business.!
* His idea was to set up a liquid oxygen plant alongside a natural gas well, tank up
your ICBM on the spot, and push lhe bulton.
t Sometime laler, Irv Glassman, of the Forrestal Laboratories, conceived of an inter
esting and entirely different type of cryogenic monopropellant. The idea was to use
The Hopeful Monoprops 147
The work done at Wyandotte by Charlie Tait and Bill Cuddy wasn't
quite as hairy as that performed at Air Products, but it approached
it closely enough to satisfy a reasonably prudent man. For one thing,
Bill, like Joe Pisani, synthesized some really fancy organic nitrates,
such as 1,2 dinitratopropane, and nitratoacetonitrile, and as might
have been expected, discovered that nobody in his right mind would
try to use them as propellants. For another, he examined the possibil
ity (admittedly slight) of using alkyl perchlorates, such as ethyl per-
chlorate, C H ClO , as monoprops. I read in a Wyandotte report that
2 5 4
they intended to do this, and phoned Bill to read to him what Sidg-
wick, in "Chemical Elements and their Compounds," had to say on
the subject of the ethyl compound.
"Hare and Boyle (1841) say [Sidgwick wrote] that it is incomparably
more explosive than any other known substance, which still seems to
be very nearly true. . . . Meyer and Spormann (1936) say that the
explosions of the perchlorate esters are louder and more destructive
than those of any other substance; it was necessary to work with mini
mum quantities under the protection of thick gloves, iron masks
[Ha, there, M. Dumas!], and thick glasses, and to handle the vessels
with long holders." But Cuddy (presumably investing in leather gloves
and an iron mask first) went ahead anyway. He told me later that the
esters were easy enough to synthesize, but that he and his crew had
never been able to fire them in a motor, since they invariably deto
nated before they could be poured into the propellant tank. It is
perhaps unnecessary to add that this line of investigation was not
further extended.
A system on which they worked for more than two years was based
on a solution of a fuel in tetranitromethane — the stuff that had meant
nothing but trouble to everybody who had ever had anything to do
with it. And Bill and Charlie had their troubles.
One fuel they tried was nitrobenzene. It dissolved nicely in the
TNM, to make a propellant with the proper oxygen balance, and the
solution seemed reasonably stable. But when they card-gapped it,
they found that its sensitivity was over 300 cards. (In my own work, I
flatly refused to have anything to do with anything with a card-gap
figure much over 30.) Acetonitrile, which they chose as a fuel (they
a mixture of acetylene and excess liquid hydrogen. When they reacted, the product
would be methane, which, with the excess hydrogen, would be the working fluid,
while the heat of decomposition of the acetylene plus that of formation of the methane
would be the energy source. Considering the theoretical performance, the chamber
temperature would have been remarkably low. The idea, however, has not yet been
tested experimentally.
148 Ignition
had calculated the performances of dozens of the possibilities, and
had tried a few of them) wasn't quite as bad as the nitrobenzene, but
it was bad enough. But about this time some of the people in the
monoprop business, when accused of producing something which
was insanely hazardous, would answer blithely, "Sure, I know it's
sensitive, but the engineers can design around it." (The engineers
took a dim view of this.)
So they went ahead anyway, and actually managed to fire the stuff
in a micro-motor. Most of the time. Sometimes, generally, and em
barrassingly, when they were demonstrating it to visitors, it would
let go with a frightful bang, demolishing the motor and the instru
mentation, and scaring everybody half to death. Tait and Cuddy
sweat blood, but they were never able to make the TNM mixtures
into reliable propellants, and late in 1958 the thrust of their work
shifted to the amine nitrates.
If Tait and Cuddy were fighting a lost cause, Jack Gould, atStauffer,
must have been smoking Acupulco Gold. His investigations were
pure fantasy, to be described properly only by Lewis Carroll. He had
a Navy contract to develop "High Energy Monopropellants," and his
efforts in that direction challenge belief. The most sensible thing he
tried was to dissolve NH in NF . Both are quite stable compounds,
3 3
and he might have come up with a high performing and reasonably
safe propellant. Unfortunately, the ammonia wouldn't dissolve in
the NF to any extent. Otherwise:
3
He tried to make nitronium borohydride, NO BH , and failed.
2 4
(The idea of a stable salt with an oxidizing cation and a reducing
anion isn't very plausible on the face of it.)
He tried to mix pentaborane with nitro-ethyl nitrate. They ex
ploded on contact. (The NEN by itself card-gapped at about 50
cards.)
He tried to mix NF and diborane. They reacted.
3
He tried to mix NEN with amine derivatives of various boranes.
They reacted or exploded.
And so on indefinitely. And in every quarterly report he would list a
lot of hypothetical compounds, like di-imide, H—N=N—H, which
would be beautiful propellants if you could only make them. Finally
the Rocket Branch, fed up, told him to quit that sort of foolishness
and to work on the NF systems instead. Which, starting about the end
of 1958, is what he did.
While all this was going on, the amine nitrate monopropellants
were very much in the picture — but NARTS was not alone there with
The Hopeful Monoprops 149
them. GE jumped in and started motor work, trying to use Isolde in
a novel self-pumping motor that they were developing. (They blew
up their setup, which goes to show that it isn't a good idea to try to
develop a new type of motor with an experimental propellant. One
unknown at a time is plenty to worry about!)
Even before the Isolde report was published, Bost and Fox at Phil
lips Petroleum had made nitrate salts of some of their bi-tertiary
amines, and dissolved the salts in nitric acid to come up with AN pro-
pellants of their own. They discovered, however, that their thermal
stability was extremely poor, which agreed with our own experience
with tertiaries. They also discovered that their di-nitrate solutions
were extremely viscous, as we had learned, very early in the game,
when we tried to make a propellant from ethylene diamine.
At NARTS, the engineers plowed ahead, trying Isolde in high pres
sure motors—1000 instead of 300 psi chamber pressure —and as a
regenerative coolant. It could be used that way, but the process was
somewhat precarious. You had to shut down with a water flush through
the system, or the propellant left in the cooling passages of the still-
hot motor would cook off and probably blow up the works.
This was all very commendable, but not very interesting to anybody
except a hardware merchant. Which I was not. So I decided to see
whether quaternary ammonium nitrates would make better propel-
lants than secondary ammonium nitrates. We had never investigated
the quaternaries, since they were comparatively difficult to make, and
there was no a priori reason to believe that they would be any better
or any worse than Isolde. But there was only one way to find out.
We had a little tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide in the laboratory,
so I made it into the nitrate salt — it crystallized beautifully — and had
it made up into propellant. We didn't have enough for card-gap work,
but we tried it in the thermal stability tester. And got a shock.
It was incredibly stable. When Isolde cooked off in fifty minutes at
130°, the new stuff just sat there. And at 160° it would stand up for
more than a week with nothing happening. (Isolde lasted two minutes
at 160°.)
This was exciting, and we looked around for a way to make more
of the stuff. Tetramethyl ammonium nitrate wasn't commercially
available — there was no reason why anybody would have wanted it
before — but the chloride was, and I ordered enough to convert into
a reasonable amount of the salt we wanted. The conversion was easy
enough, even though we used up a lot of expensive silver nitrate
doing it (we later went to the trouble of reclaiming the silver, so we
could use it over and over) and we soon had enough propellant to do
150 Ignition
card-gap tests. And our new propellant at X = 1.2 had a sensitivity of
about five cards, which meant that the shock wave pressure that was
needed to set if off was more than twice the pressure that would deto
nate Isolde.* Immensely cheered, we christened her with the obvious
name "Tallulah" (as being practically impervious to shock) and con
tinued on our way. This was early in 1957.
The only trouble with Tallulah was that when it was mixed up to
\ = 1.20, the freezing point was much too high —about—22°. (Such a
beautifully symmetrical ion can hardly be restrained from crystalliz
ing.) So we next tried the ethyl trimethyl salt ("Portia," but don't ask
me to explain the convoluted line of reasoning that led to that name!)
and the diethyl dimethyl ammonium nitrate. ("Marguerite," and don't
ask me to explain that one either.) Portia didn't quite make it —it
would meet the freezing point specifications at X= 1.10, but not at
1.20, and it crystallized poorly and was rather hygroscopic. Marguerite
met the freezing point specifications all right, but it crystallized very
badly, and was so hygroscopic as to be practically unusable.
These salts we had made for us by outside manufacturers who had
the pressure equipment which we did not have, and which is prac
tically indispensable in making quaternaries in any quantity. John
Gall at Pennsalt, and Dr. Phyllis Oja of Dow were both remarkably
helpful here in talking their respective pilot plants into making the
things and absorbing the financial loss involved. (We got the salts for
much less than it cost the manufacturers to make them.)
* About this time I got curious as to whether or not the structure-sensitivity rela
tionships I had found in the amine nitrate monoprops applied to other systems, par
ticularly since McGonnigle had remarked to me that straight chain hydrocarbons in
NO were more sensitive than branched chains. I knew that Tallulah at X = 1.0 with
2 4
CH
3
I +
the fuel ion structure CH—N—CH card-gapped at some eight cards, while the pro-
3 3
CH
3
pellant with the isomeric fuel ion NHJ—CH—CH—CH—CH gapped 58 —a
2 2 2 3
difference of fifty cards due to structure alone. So I got some normal pentane,
CH
3
CH—CH—CH—CH—CH and some neopentane CH—C—CH and had them
3 2 2 2 3 3 3
CH
3
both made up with NO to k = 1.0, and had them card-gapped. And the normal pen
2 4
tane had a sensitivity of about 100 cards, and the neopentane, 50 cards. Again a dif
ference of 50 cards, which meant that the ratio of the critical shock wave pressures due
to structure was the same in both systems. I was fascinated by this coincidence, but
never had the chance to carry the work any further. It's recommended to the attention
of sonic future investigator.
The Hopeful Monoprops 151
If Marguerite had poor physical properties, a more compact and
symmetrical isomer might do the job, and trimethyl isopropyl am
monium nitrate was the next thing we tried. That was line —good
freezing point, excellent thermal stability, a little more sensitive than
Tallulah on the card-gap, but not enough to matter, and physical
properties that made it a joy to handle. We called it "Phyllis." (After
all, when a lady talks her employers into making 150 pounds of a com
pletely unheard of salt for you, and then doesn't charge you anything
for it, on the grounds that the paper work would cost more than the
stuff is worth, the least a gentleman can do is to name it after her!)
At the end of 1957, Phyllis looked like the best bet, but we kept on
looking. All through 1957, and for three years more, we scurried
about, rounding up likely looking amines, quaternizing them and
checking them out. We'd usually make enough at first to check the
thermal stability and the melting point, and then, if it passed these
tests (most of them didn't) make a lot big enough for card-gap work.
And if a candidate showed up well there, it was time to look for some
body who would make enough for motor work.
In January, 1958, Bost and Fox, of Phillips, with a new Air Force
contract, returned to the monopropellant business with a splash. Phil
lips, of course, had all the fancy equipment that a man could desire,
and they could work fast. For instance, if they wanted the fuel-ion
C C
C—N—C—C—N-C (hydrogens, as usual omitted for simplicity) they
C C
would simply react ethylene chloride with trimethylamine, in almost
any solvent, under pressure, and have what they wanted. We envied
them their equipment and cursed the affluence of the petroleum in
dustry. Anyhow, they synthesized about a dozen different quaternary
amine nitrates, dissolved them in nitric acid, and checked out their
properties. They did some work with perchlorates, but found that
they were entirely too sensitive; and some with N O and N O -H O
2 4 2 4 2
mixtures, but found that the nitrate salts weren't sufficiently soluble
in N O to make a propellant, and that when enough water was added
2 4
to make them soluble they lost too much energy. So they resigned
themselves to investigating the same sort of systems that we were
working on. And for a year or so our two programs went along more
or less in parallel —they working on double ended propellants, we
working on single enders.
A newcomer in the field was j. Neff, of Hughes Tool. (Yes, Howard
152 Ignition
Hughes' company.) Early in 1958, armed with a Navy contract and
more than the usual complement of optimism, he started work on the
development of a boron-based nitric acid monopropellant. The pro
gram lasted about a year and a half, and while it didn't lead to a use
ful propellant, it involved some interesting chemistry. His most nearly
successful approach was based on the carborane structure, in which
two carbon atoms take their place with the ten borons in the open
basket decaborane structure to form a twelve-atom closed icosahedral
cage. (See the boron chapter.) To one or both of these carbons he
would attach a dimethylaminomethyl or dimethylaminoethyl group,
then make the nitrate salt of the result, and dissolve the salt in nitric
acid. In some cases he managed to get away with it, although ignition
was likely if he mixed the components too rapidly. But his solutions
were unstable; they would evolve gas if they were warmed up a bit, or
would separate into two layers, or do something else to emphasize that
this was not the way to make a monopropellant. His work never got
to the stage of motor testing.
Nor did Aerojet's monopropellant work for the Air Force. Late in
1958, M. K. Barsh, A. F. Graefe, and R. E. Yates started investigating
certain boron ions, such as [BH (NHs) J+, with the intention of making
2 2
the nitrates and dissolving them in nitric acid. There was a whole
family of these ions, sometimes with hydrazine in place of the ammo
nia, some containing more than one boron atom, and so on. The chlo
ride of the one shown above can be obtained by milling together in a
ball-mill lithium borohydride and ammonium chloride. Max Barsh
and Co. called these ions the "Hepcats," from High Energy Producing
CATions. (My deplorable habit of giving propellants fancy names was
apparently catching!) They made some attempt to synthesize the alu
minum analogs of some of the ions, without any notable success. But
unfortunately, by the end of July 1959, they had discovered that the
Hepcats weren't stable, even in water, let alone nitric acid or N O .
2 4
End of the Hepcats.
As I have said, Phyllis seemed to be the most promising AN around
at the beginning of 1958, and by the end of that year it, as well as
Tallulah, had been fired successfully by NARTS and by Spencer King,
of Hughes Tool. Howard Bost's "Ethane" had also been fired, and,
as far as performance was concerned, there didn't seem to be much
to choose among them. I don't think that anybody ever actually fired
either Portia or Marguerite. In most of these monopropellant tests,
ignition was by a UDMH slug. This was more complicated, of course,
than using our "Tristan" igniter, but it was considerably more reliable
for test stand work.
The Hopeful Monoprops 153
The next development was touched off by John Gall, of Pennsalt,
who, in the summer of 1958, sent me samples of two amine nitrates
for evaluation. The ions are shown below.
C-C C-C
/ \ / \
+ +
+ N—C—C—N + C—N—C—C—N—C
\ / \ /
C-C C-C
There was some delay —one of my gang goofed and made the test
propellants up in the wrong proportions, so we had to ask for another
sample —but we finally managed to run off thermal stability tests. The
tertiary ammonium nitrate, of course, was no good, but the quater
nary appeared to be at least as stable as Tallulah. It then occurred to
me that it might be interesting to compare the three different, but
very similar, ions shown below, which might be thought of as made
of two Tallulah ions joined by one, two, or three links respectively.
C CC C-C C C-C
I l \ / \ / +/ \
+ + + + +
C—N—C—C—N—C N N C—N—C—C—N—C
I I / \ / \ \ /
C CC C-C C C-C
Mike Walsh, of our laboratory, announced our intention of doing
this at an ARS meeting in the middle of September, and we started in
at once. The nitrate of the first ion was easily available: It was Howard
Bost's "Ethane" salt. For the third, we got another and larger sample
from John Gall. The second had never been made, but Jefferson
Chemical Co. made N,N' dimethylpiperazine, and it wasn't any trick
at all to quaternize that and get the salt he wanted. Anyway, we made
up the propellants, and tried them in the termal stability tester at
160°. Number 1 lasted for a bit more than two hours. Number 2
lasted about two minutes. And number 3 just sat there, doing nothing,
until we got bored with the whole business and cut off the test after
three days.
This was verrrry interesting — apparently we had something even
tougher than Tallulah. So we made it up to X = 1.2, and card-gapped
it. And discovered, to our astonishment, that it did not detonate even
at zero cards. This was more than interesting —it was sensational. The
freezing point was bad, —5°C, but we figured that we could get around
that somehow, and it didn't dampen our enthusiasm.
It had to have a good name. Nobody was going to call it by its for
mal title, 1,4, diaza, 1,4, dimethyl, bicyclo 2,2,2, octane dinitrate, that
154 Ignition
was for sure. The ion had a nice symmetrical closed cage structure,
so I called it "Cavea" (which, after all, has a vaguely feminine sound)
after the Latin for cage. Nobody objected —it was easy to remember
and to pronounce, although lots of people asked me what it meant!
We went through the usual routine, burning the salt in the calorim
eter to get its heat of formation, measuring the heat of solution of
the salt in the acid (these two so we could make decent performance
calculations) measuring the density and the viscosity of the propellant
as a function of temperature, and all the rest. And everything was
fine except that freezing point.
One valiant attempt to remedy the situation went on for months,
and got exactly nowhere. I reasoned that a single ended ion, such as,
C-C C-C
/ \ / \
+ +
C—N—C—C—C or C—N—C—C—C—C
\ / \ /
C-C C-C
would result in a propellant with a freezing point that would suit any
body. The difficulty lay in getting the nitrates of either of the ions in
question. I shopped around for months before I found an outfit that
would —or could —make me a sample of the first one. And when it
finally came in and was made into a propellant, the thermal stability
was abysmally bad. Spurge Mobley, in my own laboratory, synthesized
the other (it was the very devil of a job and took him weeks), and it,
too, as a propellant, had an impossibly bad thermal stability. Oh, well,
it was a good idea, anyway.
In the meantime we (and BuAer) we're in a hurry to get Cavea into
a motor. So we wanted a large amount of Cavea salt —fast.
I knew that John Gall's people had made it by methylating triethyl-
C-C
/ \
ene diamine N—C—C—N and at the beginning of December he told
\ /
C-C
me that the latter came from Houdry Process Co. It was used for a
polymerization catalyst and sold under the peculiarly repulsive trade
name "Dabco." In the meantime, he could furnish me with Cavea salt
for about seventy dollars a pound, in ten pound lots. I put in an order,
but I wasn't entirely convinced that the salt couldn't be made more
cheaply than by reacting methyl iodide (which is quite expensive) with
triethylene diamine, and then metathesizing with silver nitrate.
Maybe I could do the synthesis differently. Instead of starting
The Hopeful Monoprops 155
C-C
. / \
with N—C—C—N and putting the carbons on the ends to get
C-C
C-C
/ \
+ +
C—N-C—C—N—C, might it not be possible to start with Jefferson
C-C
C-C
Chemical's N N' dimethylpiperazine, C—N N—C and plug
1
C-C
in a two carbon bridge to get the same thing? I could use ethylene
bromide (which is a whole lot cheaper than methyl iodide) as the bridg
ing agent, and would come up with the bromide rather than the iodide
salt.
We tried it, and the reaction worked beautifully, giving us about a
95 percent yield on the first try. The next thing to do was to find a
cheap way to convert from the bromide to the nitrate.
I knew that it was quite easy to oxidize the bromide ion to free bro
mine, but that it was considerably tougher to force it up to the bro-
mate. And I was pretty sure that nitric acid would do the first and not
the second. If I added the Cavea bromide to fairly strong, say 70 per
cent, nitric acid, the reaction should go
2Br- + 2HNO -» 2HBr + 2NO -
3 3
and then
2HBr + 2HNO -> 2NO + 2H O + Br .
3 2 2 2
And if I ran a stream of air through the mixture, to blow out the bro
mine and the NO , I should be left with a solution of Cavea nitrate
2
in fairly dilute nitric acid.
We tried it, and it worked. But we discovered that if we added the
salt to the acid too fast, or let the bromine concentration build up, we
got a brick-red precipitate of Cavea tribromide — the salt of the Br "
3
anion, and it took hours of blowing before that would dissociate and
release the bromine. I had heard vaguely of the possibility of such an
anion, but that was the first time I ever saw one of its salts. Anyway,
we dried out the nitrate over a steam bath, recrystallized it from water
(it crystallized in beautiful hexagonal crystals) and had our Cavea salt
by a simple route that didn't require any expensive reagents.
156 Ignition
By this time it was the middle of February 1959, and we had learned
that Howard Bost, working with his di-quaternaries, had independ
ently hit upon Cavea, and had, like us, decided that it was the best
propellant to work with. So now our two programs had converged
completely. This was emphasized at a symposium on the AN mono-
propellants, held at NARTS on the first and second of April. Never
have I met such unanimous agreement in such a high-powered group.
(The nineteen guests comprised eighteen PhD's and one drunken
genius.) And we were all convinced that the future belonged to Cavea,
possibly with some structural modification that would get us a better
freezing point.
One new development, however, was reported by Dr. Wayne Bar
rett, of W. R. Grace Co. He had methylated UDMH, to get the ion,
CH
3
I +
CH —N—NH and had made a monoprop with the nitrate of that.
3 2
CA
3
Besides the trimethyl compound shown, he had also made the triethyl
and the tripropyl, and was so new and innocent in the propellant
business that he didn't even start to run when, as he mixed up the
propyl salt with the acid, the stuff had started to warm up and give
off NO fumes! Anyway, I had my gang immediately make up some
2
of his propellant and give it the treatment. We learned about it on
Thursday the second of April, had the synthesis and purification com
pleted and the methyl propellant made up by Tuesday the seventh,
and on the eighth saw it wreck our thermal stability tester all over
again. (It sat there quietly for fourteen minutes and then detonated
— but violently.) I phoned Barrett, and warned him against his brain
child, but he decided to go ahead anyway and repeat our stability test.
After some weeks he phoned me and reported that his sample had
lasted for seventeen minutes before blowing up the place, and did I
consider that a good check!
In the meantime, I had been taking steps toward getting Houdry
and Jefferson interested in manufacturing Cavea salt. I had phoned
them both on February 19, describing the salt I wanted, and asking if
they were interested in bidding on a hundred pounds of it. At Houdry,
apparently everybody took off on cloud nine. (This was early in 1959,
remember, the cold war was on, everybody was excited over missiles
and space, and apparently everybody was convinced —falsely—that
there was a lot of money to be made in the rocket propellant business.)
Anyhow, they phoned me back several times, and when I got home
that evening they had the cleaning lady on the phone. And the next
day they had their director of research up from Philadelphia to talk
The Hopeful Monoprops 157
to me. Before I got through with them I told him that Jefferson Chem
ical was in on the bidding, too, and hinted that perhaps Jefferson could
make the stuff cheaper than Houdry could.
The response of Jefferson Chemical was not quite so hysterical, but
enthusiastic enough. I got their director of research in Houston, Dr.
McClellan, and described the dimethyl piperazine-ethyl bromide
reaction to him —he didn't really believe it until he tried it himself—
and asked him what he could do. I also hinted to him that perhaps
Houdry could give me a better price than he could. This is the pro
cedure known as playing both ends against the middle.
Both companies delivered preliminary samples for approval within
a month, and I discovered that McClellan had come up with an inter
esting method of getting rid of the bromide. He would acidify the
Cavea bromide cold, with nitric acid, and then blow ethylene oxide
through the solution. It reacted, C H O + HBr —» HOC H Br, with
2 4 2 4
the HBr to form ethylene bromohydrin, which was just blown out of
the system. I considered this a neat trick.*
Anyway, both companies eventually came up with bids, and, as I
suspected would be the case, Jefferson's was the better. They wanted
fifteen dollars a pound for Cavea salt, while the best that Houdry
could do, at that time, was seventy-five, although their research people
thought that they might be able to argue their business end down to
fifty. So now there was no supply problemto cope with. Howard Bost
C-C
/ \
+ +
did some work with C—C-N—C—C—N—C—C which had a better
\ /
C-C
freezing point than Cavea, and Charlie Tait phoned me on June 10
with some interesting news. Apparently Wyandotte had decided to
give up the TNM monoprops as a lost cause, and to shift to the AN
family. And they had some assorted substituted piperazines available,
C
\
C-C
/ \
such as C—N N—C. And so Charlie bridged that with ethyl-
\ /
C-C
* He visited me some weeks later, and I asked him what Jefferson's substituted piper
azines were used for. He answered, in a drawl as flat as Texas, "Well, they're a lot of
farmers down our way, and they raise a lot of hawgs. And the hawgs get intestinal
worms, and don't fatten up the way they should. So the farmer puts some of the piper-
azine in their feed, and lhe worm goes to sleep and forgets to hold on. And when he
wakes up the hawg isn't there any morel"
158 Ignition
C-C
+ /
ene bromide, and came up with G—-N—C-C—N—C. The propellant
\ /
C-C
had a freezing point well below —54°, and card-gapped at only three
cards. Otherwise, it was just like Cavea. It was called Cavea B (the
Rocket Branch thought that "2 methyl Cavea" would be too revealing
a name!)
Wyandotte had made other similar compounds, some with two ex
tra methyl groups, variously arranged, but Cavea B was the simplest
and hence the best, and the others got nowhere. And Spurge Mobley
had found himself a seven-membered piperazine-like compound
C—C—C
/ \
C—N N—C and had bridged that one to produce the
C C
C—C—C
/ \
+ +
odd structure C-N C-C N-C
\ /
C C
Spurge was highly indignant at me because, while his creation had
the right freezing point, I noted that it was no improvement over
Cavea B and cost several times as much, and so wouldn't push it.
Cavea B was the winner, and seemed to be the ideal monopropel-
lant. And by the end of the year it had been fired successfully by
NARTS, GE, Wyandotte, and Hughes Tool, with JPL soon to follow.
It performed very well in a motor, yielding 94 or so percent of the
theoretical impulse with a comparatively small chamber. Combustion
was remarkably smooth —better than with the original Cavea (now
called Cavea A) which was apparently just too symmetrical and stable
to offer the combustion process any place to take hold. And there was
no difficulty with supply. Wyandotte had any amount of the piper-
azine raw material.
Although the AN's were firmly planted in center stage at this time,
other monopropellant systems were vigorously elbowing their way
toward the spotlight. For instance, Kenneth Aoki, at Wyandotte, made
C-C
O:N—C—C—N:0 the diamine oxide of triethylenediamine, and dis-
The Hopeful Monoprops 159
solved that in nitric acid. But he found that the heat of solution was
so high (the acid probably decomposed the oxide and formed the
nitrate instead) that any possible performance advantage over Cavea
CH —CH
2 2
/ \
A or B was negated. He also made O N—N N—NO
2 2
\ /
CH —CH
2 2
intending to dissolve it in N O or TNM, but found that it was too in
2 4
soluble in those oxidizers to be of any use.
A more interesting approach to monopropellant development
derived from the B-N propellant system, described in the boron
chapter. As has been related, bipropellant B-N work had been
plagued by combustion problems, and it was hypothesized —or hoped
— that these might be alleviated if the boron and the nitrogen were
combined in the same propellant —or even the same molecule.
McElroy and Hough, at Callery Chemical Co. started work on what
they called the "Monocals." These consisted of an adduct, or addi
tion compound of decaborane and two or three mulecules of mono-
methyl hydrazine, all dissolved in about seven molecules of hydrazine.
The mixing of the MMH with the decaborane had to be done in
solution, or the product would explode when it warmed up. The
propellants weren't particularly uniform, and varied considerably
from lot to lot, for reasons not well understood, if at all. They were
extremely viscous, but didn't appear to be particularly sensitive.
Wyandotte tried them on the test stand, in a 50-thrust motor, with
discouraging results. Bill Cuddy and his crew got off five runs alto
gether, four of them either starting or ending with a detonation and
a wrecked motor. The Monocals died, unlamented, in I960.
"Dekazine" lasted a little longer. In June of 1958, H. F. Hawthorne's
group at Rohm and Haas prepared B H -2NH by reacting bis (acet-
10 12 3
onitrile) decaborane with hydrazine. They had hoped to incorporate
the N-N group of the hydrazine into the decaborane molecule, so as
to get the closed cage carborane structure, but found that their prod
uct retained the open decaborane basket, and had no N-N bonds.
At any rate, they dissolved one mole of it in about 7.5 of hydrazine
(they couldn't get it to dissolve in fewer) and thought that they had a
monopropellant. It wasn't the easiest thing in the world to live with.
First, it picked up oxygen from the air. Second, it was thermally
rather sensitive, starting to decompose exothermically at 127°. Its
card-gap value was low —about 4 cards—but it was indecently sensi
tive to adiabatic compression, rating, on that test, between normal
propyl nitrate and nitroglycerine, But they managed to get, it fired,
160 Ignition
over the next couple of years, by Spencer King at Hughes and by
Bob Ahlert at Rocketdyne at the 500-pound thrust level. Nobody ever
got more than 75 percent of its theoretical performance out of it,
and nobody could seem to find a way to prevent it from detonating
(usually near the injector in a motor run) when it felt in the mood.
Which was frequently — Ahlert survived some really impressive ex
plosions. And so by the end of 1960, everybody gave up Dekazine as
a bad job, and it was tenderly laid out on the marble slab next to that
occupied by the late Monocal.
In 1959, however, Hawthorne of Rohm and Haas made an inter
esting observation, which was to lead to a different approach to the
problem of a B-N monopropellant. He observed that when he re
acted the bis (acetonitrile) (An) adduct of decaborane, in benzene at
room temperature, with triethylamine (NEt ) the reaction went mainly
3
as below.
B H An + 2NEt -» B H (NEt ) + 2An
10 12 2 3 10 l2 3 2
However, if he ran the reaction at the boiling (refluxing) point of
benzene, the reaction went almost quantitatively this way:
B H An -f 2NEt -* (HNEt +)B Hr + 2An
10 12 2 3 3 10 0
The open decaborane basket had closed up to the 10-cornered, 16-
faced closed-cage structure of what was later called the "perhydro-
decaborate ion." This was a remarkably stable structure, the anion of
a very strong acid —almost as strong as sulfuric acid. It was no trick
to get the hydrazine salt of this acid (several simple routes were
discovered that same year), (N Hs) B H . The unsolvated salt was
2 2 10 10
shock-sensitive, but when crystallized with either one or two mole
cules of hydrazine — it was easy to get either form — it was safe and easy
to handle. And it could be dissolved in hydrazine to make a propel-
lant.*
Unfortunately, you couldn't dissolve enough of it in hydrazine to
get the number of B atoms in the mixture to equal the number of
N atoms, which is what you want with a B-N monopropellant. Lou
Rapp, at Aerojet (he had recently moved there from Reaction Mo
tors) somewhere around the beginning of 1961, thought that if he
* I had the bright idea that it might also be used to make a peroxide-based mono
propellant. I had some of the ammonium salt of the perhydrodecaborate ion made,
and put a few milligrams of it on a watch glass. I then put a drop of concentrated HO
2 2
next to the salt, and tilted the watch glass to bring the two into contact. There was a
brilliant green-white flash, and the sharpest detonation I have ever heard. The watch
glass was reduced, literally, to a fine powder. End of bright idea.
The Hopeful Monoprops 161
substituted one of the "Hepcat" cations for the hydrazinium ions in
the salt, he might be able to remedy that deficiency,
I had the same idea at the same time — and I could move faster than
he could. My outfit was small, and I didn't have to pay any attention
to contracts, since I didn't have any, the brass seldom paid any atten
tion to what I was doing, and I could usually try whatever I wanted
to try before anybody in authority could get around to telling me not
to. So it went like a breeze.
I had Mobley make up a few grams of the Hepcat chloride by mill
ing ammonium chloride and lithium borohydride together, as has
already been described. And I had him make up some potassium
perhydrodecaborate. Then he dissolved the two in liquid ammonia,
and mixed them together in the proper proportions. The reaction
went
K B H + 2[BH (NH ) ]C1 -*
2 10 10 2 3 2
[BH (NH )J B H + 2KGL
2 3 2 10 10
The potassium chloride precipitated, and was filtered off, the am
monia was allowed to evaporate, and I had the Hepcat perhydro
decaborate. After making sure that I had what I thought I had — using
IR and so on for diagnosis —I had him add one mole of it to six moles
of hydrazine. Four of the hydrazines displaced the ammonias in the
cations and it bubbled off", and two were left over as solvent. So I
finally had [BH (N H )J B H + 2N H . Here I had two borons
2 2 4 2 10 10 2 4
in the cations, and ten in the anion. There were eight nitrogens in the
cations, and four in the solvent. And finally, there were twenty hydro
gens in the cations, ten in the anion, and eight in the solvent, so that
the whole mess balanced to 12BN+ 19H . And miraculously, the
2
thing was liquid at room temperature, and not too viscous, and didn't
appear to be particularly sensitive. We had only a few cc of the stuff,
but it looked interesting.
The psychological payoff came at a monopropellant meeting in
August. Lou Rapp described what he was trying to do, and I then took
a sadistic delight (I was chairman of that session) in pulling the rug
out from under him by pointing out that we had already done it,
and describing how. Lou Rapp and I were good friends, but it wasn't
often that I had a chance to do him in the eye, and it was too good an
opportunity to miss.
However, that was about as far as that propellant ever got. The
Army brass (the Navy had moved out a year before, and the Army
had taken over NARTS which became the Liquid Rocket Propulsion
1
162 Ignition
Laboratory of Picatinny Arsenal) passed down the word that the
Army had no interest in BN monopropellants, and to knock it off. I
believe that their decision was the right one. My monster would have
been horribly expensive to make, its density was by no means im
pressive, and there was no a priori reason to believe that it would
perform any better than the other B-N monoprops. The stuff was
not a practicable propellant. The whole performance had been a
tour de force designed to show that a balanced B-N monoprop could
be made. It was a lot of fun, but it was the end of the B-N monopro
pellants.
All this interest in monopropellants had led to the formation, at the
first monopropellant conference in November 1953, of the Mono-
propellant Test Methods Committee, which was operated first under
the sponsorship of BuAer, then under the American Rocket Society,
and then under Wright Air Development Center. In November 1958
its field was extended to cover all liquid propellants, and the Liquid
Propellant Information Agency took it over, and it's still in operation.
I served on it, on and off, for several years.
The original reason for its formation was the inherent instability
of monopropellants. Any monopropellant with a reasonable amount
of energy in it can be detonated if you go about it the right way. Every
body in the business had his own pet method of measuring the sensi
tivity of the monoprops he was working with. The only difficulty was
that no two methods were alike, and it was just simply impossible to
compare the results from one laboratory with those from another.
In fact, it was just about impossible to define, say, shock sensitivity,
at all. Even the relative sensitivities of two propellants might depend —
and often did —upon the apparatus used to make the measurement.
The job of the committee was to examine all the methods used, to
pick out those which gave more or less reproducible results, or to
talk people into developing such methods, then to standardize these,
and finally to try to persuade the people in the field to use those
methods. Then, it was hoped, even if none of our tests or results made
sense we would be unanimous in our fantasies and could talk to each
other with something approaching coherence, and with luck, com
prehension by the hearer.
The first test that was adopted in July 1955 was the card-gap test,
previously described. It had first been developed by the Waltham
Abbey People, and then streamlined by NOL, and we spent a lot of
time chasing down anomalous results. I remember Joe Herrickes, of
the Bureau of Mines, and I firing our two card-gap setups side by
side for a whole day, trying to discover why, with one monopropellant
The Hopeful Monoprops 163
they agreed beautifully, and with another disagreed wildly. We
finally discovered, after interchanging practically everything in the
setups, that the trouble lay in the sample cups. Joe's were made of
aluminum, mine of iron pipe. The committee standardized on the
iron pipe, and we published. Putting a final report together was some
times something of a Donnybrook. The committee, as might be
imagined, was composed of highly self-confident and howlingly
articulate individualists, and there were always at least six of us pres
ent each of whom considered himself a master of English prose style.
Whew!
A test that took a lot longer to decide on was the "Drop-Weight."
For years, people in the explosive business had been dropping weights
on samples of their wares, and rating their sensitivity on the basis of
how far you had to drop how big a weight in order to make the sample
go off. We looked into the matter and discovered, to our dismay, that
the JPL tester disagreed with the Picatinny tester, which disagreed
with the Hercules apparatus, whose results could not be compared
with those of the Bureau of American Railroads, which, in turn,
contradicted those of the Bureau of Mines. Furthermore, none of
them was any good at all with liquids.
Bill Cuddy, of Wyandotte, in March 195 "7 described a tester de
signed specifically for liquids; it was modified by Don Griffin of Olin
Mathieson and finally evolved into what is known as the OM drop
weight tester.* Actually it was a device for measuring adiabatic sensi
tivity. The falling weight suddenly compressed a tiny and standard
ized air bubble above the one drop sample, and the adiabatic heating
of this bubble set the thing off—or wasn't enough to do it, as the case
might be. It was, and is, quite a satisfactory instrument once you got
used to its little foibles. For instance, it has to be on a really solid
foundation if you hope to get reproducible results. We ended up
with the instrument bolted to a three-foot square of three-inch armor
plate, which was in turn bolted to a six-foot cube of concrete which
rested on bedrock —granite. That way, it worked fine.
Al Mead, of Air Reduction, came up in 1958 with the standard
thermal stability tester, another very useful instrument. In it, a small
sample was heated at a constant rate, and the temperature at which
the sample started to warm up faster than the heating bath was taken
as the takeoff point. We used it, along with our own, for years. They
really measured different things, and we could use them both.
* Don Griffin, a free soul ii'J ever knew one, lhen took a year's vacation fiom rocket
propulsion, spending il in the Hula-Hoop business, He said it made more sense.
164 Ignition
Other tests were standardized and published, but these were the
more useful and most often used. One subject that was investigated
for years was detonation velocity, the critical diameter for detonation,
and the construction of detonation traps. If you have a monopropel-
lant blow in your motor, that's one thing. But if that detonation
propagates back (at some 7000 meters per second, usually) through
the propellant line to the propellant tank, and that blows, then you
can be in real trouble. If the diameter of the propellant line is small
enough, the detonation will not propagate and dies out — the limiting
diameter being called the "critical diameter." It varies with the nature
of the propellant, the material of which the line is made (steel, alumi
num, glass, etc.) with the temperature, and maybe with a few more
things. (When we found that a detonation in Isolde would propagate
nicely through hypodermic-needle tubing, our hair stood on end,
and we perspired gently.)
Starting around 1958, and carrying on into 1962, a lot of work on
detonation propagation and trapping was carried on at Rocketdyne,
Wyandotte, JPL, BuMines, GE, Hughes, Reaction Motors, and
NARTS-LRPL, and valiant efforts —some of them successful—were
made to find a way to stop a detonation in its tracks. Because that can
be done, sometimes, by putting a detonation trap in the line. Design
ing such a thing is not a scientific matter; it's a piece of empirical en
gineering art. And the various designs showed it. One early trap con
sisted simply of a loop in the line —like so: —-1^f When the detona
tion came barreling down the line, blowing up the tubing as it came, it
would cut the other part of the line where they crossed, leaving the
detonation no place to go. This wasn't too-reliable. The bang that cut
the line might start another, brand new, detonation going. Bob Ahlert
did very well by putting a section of Flex-Hose, a Teflon tube rein
forced with a metal wire mesh, in his line. The detonation would
simply blow this weak section out, and then have nowhere to go. And
Mike Walsh, of our group, devised a trap that worked beautifully with
Cavea B, as well as with several other monopropellants. Cavea B
would not propagate a detonation through a 0.25-inch line, but would
through a one-inch line. So Mike inserted a one-foot long piece of
two-inch piping into his one-inch line, and filled this section with a
cylindrical bar of a plastic that would resist the propellant for a rea
sonable time. (Polystyrene was good.) And he drilled sixteen 0.25-inch
holes longitudinally through this cylindrical plug, so that he had the
same area for flow as he had in the one-inch main line. And when he
checked it out, the detonation rolled down to the trap, blew up about
the first third of that, and stopped cold.
The Hopeful Monoprops 165
But detonation traps aren't always the complete answer. We dis
covered that when, in the summer of 1960, we tried to fire a 10,000-
pound thrust Cavea B motor. We didn't have Mike's trap at that time,
so we inserted a battery of sixteen 0.25-inch loop traps in the line.
Well, through a combination of this and that, the motor blew on
startup. We never discovered whether or not the traps worked —we
couldn't find enough fragments to find out. The fragments from the
injector just short-circuited the traps, smashed into the tank, and set
off the 200 pounds of propellant in that. (Each pound of propellant
had more available energy than two pounds of TNT.) I never saw
such a mess. The walls of the test cell—two feet of concrete—went out,
and the roof came in. The motor itself—a heavy, workhorse job of
solid copper— went about 600 feet down range. And a six-foot square
of armor plate sailed into the woods, cutting off a few trees at the root,
smashing a granite boulder, bouncing into the air and slicing off a few
treetops, and finally coming to rest some 1400 feet from where it
started. The woods looked as though a stampeding herd of wild ele
phants had been through.*
As may be imagined, this incident tended to give monopropellants
something of a bad name. Even if you could fire them safely —and
we soon saw what had gone wrong with the ignition process —how
could you use them in the field? Here you have a rocket set up on the
launching stand, under battlefield conditions; and what happens if
it gets hit by a piece of shrapnel? LRPL came up with the answer to
that. You keep your monoprop in the missile in two compartments:
one full of fuel-rich propellant made up to A. = 2.2 or 2.4, and the
other containing enough acid to dilute it to X = 1.2. Just before you
fire, a can-opener arrangement inside the missile slits open the barrier
separating the two liquids, you allow a few seconds for them to mix,
and then push the button. The idea —it was called the "quick mix"
concept —worked fine. We couldn't use a double-ended compound
like Cavea A or B for the propellant — made up to 2.4 the freezing
point was too high —so we first tried "Isobel," the dimethyldiisopropyl
ammonium nitrate. I phoned a chemical company in Newark to have
* When I got down to the test area after the bang, one of the rocket mechanics gal
loped up and demanded, "My God, Doc! What the Hell did you send us this time?"
The only response of which I was capable was to light a cigarette and remark, "Now,
really, Johnny! You should see my Martinis!" What got me though, was the remark by
an officer from Picatinny, after viewing the mess. This was just before NARTS was due
to be "disestablished" and taken over by the Army, and this character (metaphorically)
held his nose and stated to nobody in particular, "Now I know what the Navy means by
'disestablishment.'" I wanted Lo kill him.
166 Ignition
them make us a hundred pounds or so of the salt, and was assured
by their director of research that it couldn't be done, since the com
pound was sterically impossible. I protested that I was staring at that
moment at a bottle of the salt sitting on my desk in front of me, but
I couldn't convince him. Isobel, however, didn't quite meet the freez
ing point limitations, so we shifted to Isobel E and Isobel F, the dieth-
yldipropyl, and the ethyltripropyl salts, respectively, which did. These
didn't have quite the thermal stability I wanted (usually the higher the
X the worse the stability) so I finally came up with Isobel Z, diethyl-
diisopropyl ammonium nitrate, which was immensely better. (If that
character in Newark thought that Isobel was impossible, I wonder
what he would have thought of Isobel Z! There actually isn't any
trace of steric hindrance in the ion, but it's a near thing. Not one
more carbon atom could have been crammed into the space around
the nitrogen.) LRPL tried the fuel-rich Isobels, at 2.4 or so, as low-
energy monopropellants, for APU work and so on, and found that
they worked very well in such a role. That work was pretty well
cleaned up by 1962.
Dave Gardner, of Pennsalt, didn't anticipate any detonation prob
lems when he started work in May of 1958. What the Air Force wanted
from him was a low-energy monoprop for APU work, and one with
such thermal stability that it could survive at 200-3000C, and Dave
naturally figured that a low-energy compound with that sort of sta
bility wasn't going to give him much trouble. He worked for about
three years on the job — Sunstrand Machine Tool did his motor work
— at first with mixtures of extremely stable — and hence low-energy —
fuels in various acid oxidizers. His fuels were sometimes salts; the
tetramethyl ammonium salt of sulfuric acid, or of fluorosulfonic acid,
or of trifluoromethane sulfonic acid, or the pyridine salt of sulfuric
acid. Sometimes he used methane or ethane sulfonic acid itself as a
fuel, or the fluorinated CF CH SO H. His oxidizers were either per
3 2 3
chloric acid dihydrate, or a mixture of nitrosylpyrosulfate and sul
furic acid, sometimes with some nitric acid added. Performance
— which he wasn't looking for—was naturally poor, but he had some
remarkably heat-resistant propellants on his hands.
A little later, impressed by the remarkable stability of the —CF(N0 )
2 2
group he synthesized the monopropellant CH CF(N0 ) , which he
3 2 2
called "Daphne." (I never discovered what the name celebrated —or
commemorated.) The performance wasn't particularly startling —
that C-F bond is awfully strong —but the material appeared to be
stable to just about everything. But, alas, Daphne, too, was a woman,
and could betray him. And took out most of the test cell when she did.
The Hopeful Monoprops 167
Incidental to his monopropellant work, Dave produced a pair of
rather interesting high-density oxidizers, by fluorinating potassium
nitroformate, KC(N0 ) and similar compounds. They were
2 3
NO NO
2 2
/ /
F—C(N0 ) which he called D-Il, and F-C C F called
2 3
NO NO
2 2
D-112. He measured their heat of formation by reacting them in a
bomb calorimeter with carbon monoxide, and when he reported his
results insisted on putting my name on the paper as coauthor (which
I was not) because I'd tried that reaction first, with tetranitromethane,
and had suggested it to him as a good way to get a handle on the
thermochemistry of highly oxygenated compounds. The oxidizers
appeared, unfortunately, just in time to be made obsolete by ClF .
5
One of the strangest, and certainly the hairiest, chapter in the
propellant story had its start in two unrelated but almost simultaneous
events. First, the Advanced Research Projects Administration (ARPA)
initiated "Project Principia" early in June 1958. The idea was to get
certain large chemical companies into the business of developing
improved solid propellants. "To get the benefit of their fresh think
ing," was the phrase. American Cyanamid, Dow Chemical, Esso R
and D, Minnesota Mining and Minerals (3M), and Imperial Chemical
Industries were those invited to enter the field.
The old line propellant people —Reaction Motors, Aerojet, Rocket-
dyne—not unnaturally raised a row. In fact, they screamed from the
rooftops. "These newcomers may have all sorts of fancy equipment,
and they may be hot on molecular orbital theory and pi bonds, but
they don't know a propellant from a panty raid, and what you'll get
is a lot of expensive and useless chemical curiosities. We, on the other
hand, have been living with propellants for years, and know what they
have to do, and we're not such bad chemists ourselves, and just get
us the same fancy equipment and anything they can do we can do
better!" But their protests fell on unheeding ears, and "Principia"
got under way. (In the end, the professional propellant people turned
out to be pretty good prophets.)
The second event was the announcement by W. D. Niederhauser of
Rohm and Haas, at a propellant meeting late in September, that N F ,
2 4
in a gas phase reaction, would add across an olefinic bond, forming
H H
the structure —C C— and that this was a general reaction, appli-
NF NF
2 1
168 Ignition
cable to practically any olefin. He also announced that HNF could
2
be prepared by reacting N F with AsH .
2 4 3
So all the companies concerned in Principia started reacting N F
2 4
with various olefins to see what would happen. (Frequently what
happened was that the reactor blew up.) Rohm and Haas was, of
course, already doing this sort of thing, and at the beginning of 1959
both Reaction Motors and Jack Gould at Stauffer dropped the mono-
propellant systems they had been investigating and joined the new
field of "N-F" chemistry. And Callery Chemical Co. quickly did the
same. So there were soon at least nine organizations involved in this
sort of research,
A few glitches interfered with the march of science, and the prog
ress of the solid propellant program. The first was that practically
none of the new compounds discovered were solids. Most of them
were liquids, and rather volatile liquids at that. ARPA bowed to fate
and the facts of life, and in November of 1960 rewrote the contracts
to include work on liquids. The second glitch could not, unfortunately,
be cured by making a mark on a piece of paper.
Practically every compound discovered turned out to be indecently
sensitive and violently explosive. For instance, take the case of the
simplest NF compound, the first one discovered. Thermodynam-
H H
ically, it tends to react H—G——C—H -> 4HF + 2C. And given the
NF NF
2 2
slightest provocation, it will do just that. And the formation of four
molecules of HF produces enough energy to make the resulting ex
plosion really interesting. The things were shock sensitive. Many of
them were heat sensitive. And some were so spark sensitive that they
couldn't be poured. When you tried it, the tiny static charge formed
was frequently enough to trigger a detonation. The only way to re
duce their sensitivity, apparently, was to make a compound with a
large molecule and a small number of NF groups. Which was not
2
good for its energy content.
Another thing that was bad for their (prospective, and eventually,
maybe) propellant performance was the fact that on decomposition
they produced considerable quantities of free carbon, which, as has
been explained, is not good for performance. The obvious thing to
do was to incorporate enough oxygen in the molecule to burn the
carbon to CO. Dow, in the spring of 1960, synthesized such a com
pound, balanced to CO by the direct fluorination of urea. Its structure
The Hopeful Monoprops 169
O
Il
was F N—C—NH and it is perhaps just as well that it was produced
2 2
in very small quantities, as it was indecently spark sensitive. Jack
Gould, in 1961, reported on F N-CH —OH and it was synthesized
2 2
by I. J. Solomon of the Armour Research Institute, early in 1963, by
the mole for mole reaction of HNF and formaldehyde. Again —im
2
possibly sensitive. Allied Chemical Co., in 1962, and the Peninsular
Chemical Co., about four years ago, tried to synthesize its isomer
CH —O—NH . If they had succeeded, it would have served them
3 2
right. I know from my own experience that methoxy amine,
CH -O—NH , which can decompose at worst and most energeti
3 2
cally, only to CO and NH plus a little hydrogen, is quite sensitive on
3
the OM drop-weight apparatus. What a similar compound, whose
decomposition would lead to the formation of two HF molecules
would be likely to do, simply boggles the mind.
Esso synthesized a number of nitrate and nitramine derivatives of
NF
2
NF compounds, of which O N—CH -C—CH —NO first described
3 2 2 3
NF
2
early in 1962, is typical. Some few of the series were solids rather than
liquids, but all were impossibly sensitive. This compound is inter
esting, however, in having two NF groups on the same carbon atom.
2
This structure was made possible by a reaction discovered by the
Rohm and Haas people in 1960-61. IfHNF is reacted with an alde
2
hyde or ketone in concentrated sulfuric acid, the reaction goes
O NF
2
Il I
2HNF + R—C—R -> R—C—R + H O and you are left with two
2 2
I
NF
2
NF groups on the same carbon. The reaction was quite general, and
2
a wide variety of "geminal" difluoramino compounds were synthe-
H H
sized. They were just as sensitive as the "vicinal" or —-C—C— type.
NF NF
2 2
Another way to get oxygen into the monopropellant was to mix the
NF compound with an oxygen-type oxidizer. Jack Gould (Stauffer)
came up in 1961 with a concoction he called "Hyena," which consisted
of an NF (usually F NC H NF ) dissolved in nitric acid. J. p, Cherenko,
2 2 4 2
170 Ignition
of Callery, produced similar mixtures (called "Cyclops" this time) but
he sometimes used N O or tetranitromethane instead of the acid, and
2 4
sometimes tranquilized the propellant (he hoped) by adding pentane.
Hyena and Cyclops were both unmitigated disasters.
The man who was determined to make an NF monopropellant
work, or to prove, definitely, that it couldn't be done, was Walt
Wharton of the Army Missile Command, at Huntsville, and from the
middle of 1961 to the end of 1964 he and Joe Connaughton valiantly
and stubbornly pursued that objective. His chosen compound was
IBA, the IsoButylene Adduct of N F , made by Rohm and Haas by
2 4
CH CH NF
2 2 2
the reaction CH -C-CH + N F -» CH -C-CH . If the com-
3 3 2 4 3 3
NF
2
pound is mixed with N O (1.5 molecules of the latter to one of IBA)
2 4
the mixture is a monopropellant with a good density and a fairly at
tractive (theoretical) performance — 293 seconds. Other compounds
containing more NF groups would have given more, but the idea
2
was to get any NF to work at all.
IBA, straight, was extremely sensitive on the OM drop-weight ap
paratus, and Wharton was immensely encouraged, at first, to discover
that the addition of a very small amount of N O -less than 1 per
2 4
cent—cut this sensitivity down to practically nothing. But then he
started burning-rate studies, in a liquid strand burner. He had igni
tion problems —a hot wire wasn't too reliable —and he discovered that
the burning rate of the material was vastly sensitive to the bomb pres
sure. (A trace of ferric chloride would decrease the rate, and one of
carbon tetrachloride would increase it.) He furthermore discovered
that the material had a lamentable tendency to detonate in the bomb
or in a motor, that a glass tube detonation trap wasn't particularly
helpful, and he was made a bit thoughtful by the discovery that the
critical diameter for detonation propagation was less than 0.25 milli
meters—less than 0.01 inch.
Most of his early work was done with a "T" motor, little more than
an injector and a nozzleless chamber, with observation ports so that
the ignition process could be observed with a high-speed camera. They
tried a slug of ClF for ignition, and got a detonation instead. They
3
eventually settled on a slug of antimony pentachloride — of all things —
which gave a smooth and reliable start. By this time they were work
ing with an "expendable" motor with no nozzle and a low chamber
pressure, about two atmospheres, and were mixing the N O and IBA
2 4
remotely right on the test stand. It was fortunate that they worked
The Hopeful Monoprops 171
remotely, since 150 cc of the mixture detonated during a run and
wrecked the setup.
In the winter of 1962-63 they sent a sample of IBA (dissolved in
acetone so it could be transported more or less safely) up to LRPL for
card-gap work. We gently distilled off the acetone, and made the tests.
(Mixing the IBA and the N O was a precarious business.) Straight
2 4
IBA wasn't particularly sensitive on tard-gap, about ten cards, and
the material with 1 percent of N O in it was about the same. But
2 4
when mixed up for maximum performance — one mole of IBA to 1.5
of N O -the sensitivity was more than 96 cards. We never discovered
2 4
how much more; our interest in the subject had evaporated.*
These figures did not encourage further work with the IBA-N O
2 4
mixture. There was some talk of using the combination as a bi-pro-
pellant, but that would have been rather pointless. Wharton and
Connaughton fired the straight IBA as a monopropellant, at the 250-
pound thrust level, but there was so much free carbon in the exhaust
that they never got more than 80 percent even of its rather low spe
cific impulse. They were driven, reluctantly, to the conclusion that an
NF monopropellant was not practical politics, and abandoned the
whole idea late in 1964.
Just as Wharton was starting his IBA work, there occurred one of
the weirdest episodes in the history of rocket chemistry A. W. Haw
kins and R. W. Summers of Du Pont had an idea. This was to get a
computer, and to feed into it all known bond energies, as well as a
program for calculating specific impulse. The machine would then
juggle structural formulae until it had come up with the structure of
a monopropellant with a specific impulse of well over 300 seconds.
* Two people can operate the card-gap apparatus, and three operators is optimum
But when LRPL did this particular job (the feather-bedding at Picatinny was outra
geous) there were about seven people on the site —two or three engineers, and any
number of rocket mechanics dressed (for no particular reason) in acid-proof safety
garments So there was a large audience for the subsequent events The old destroyer
gun turret which housed our card-gap setup had become a bit frayed and tattered from
the shrapnel it had contained (The plating on a destroyer is usually thick enough to
keep out the water and the smaller fish ) So we had installed an inner layer of armor
plate, standing off about an inch and a half from the original plating And, as the set
up hadn't been used for several months, a large colony of bats —yes, bats, little Dracula
types —had moved mto the gap to spend the winter And when the first shot went off,
they all came boiling out with their sonar gear fouled up, shaking their heads and
pounding their ears They chose one rocket mechanic —as it happens, a remarkably
goosy character anyway—and decided that it was ail his fault And if you, gentle reader,
have never seen a nervous rocket mechanic, complete with monkey suit, being buzzed
by nine thousand demented bats and trying to beat them off with a shovel, there is
something missing from your experience.
172 Ignition
It would then print this out and sit back, with its hands folded over
its console, to await a Nobel prize.
The Air Force has always had more money than sales resistance,
and they bought a one-year program (probably for something in the
order of a hundred or a hundred and fifty thousand dollars) and in
June of 1961 Hawkins and Summers punched the "start" button and
the machine started to shuffle IBM cards. And to print out structures
that looked like road maps of a disaster area, since if the compounds
depicted could even have been synthesized, they would have, infallibly,
detonated instantly and violently. The machine's prize contribution to
the cause of science was the structure, H—C= C—N N-——H to
O O
F F
which it confidently attributed a specific impulse of 363.7 seconds,
precisely to the tenth of a second, yet. The Air Force, appalled, cut
the program off after a year, belatedly realizing that they could have
got the same structure from any experienced propellant man (me,
for instance) during half an hour's conversation, and at a total cost
of five dollars or so. (For drinks. I would have been afraid even to
draw the structure without at least five Martinis under my belt.)
The NF programs led to some interesting, if eventually unproduc
tive, oxidizer work. It was obvious, very early in the game, that if
you could tie enough NF groups to a carbon atom, the result would
2
be more a fluorine-type oxidizer than a monopropellant. Cyanamid,
late in 1959, took the first step in this direction when they synthesized
F N—C=NF. Then 3M, in the spring of 1960, synthesized "Com-
2
F
pound M," F C(NF ) by the direct fluorination of ammeline, and a
2 2 2
little later came up with "Compound R," FC(NF ) by the same route.
2 3
Dow and 3M, in 1960, both synthesized perfluoroguanidine, or "PFG"
FN=C(NF ) by the reaction of fluorine diluted with nitrogen on
2 2
guanidine. And finally, in 1963, "Compound A" (delta) or "T" or
"Tetrakis" — from tetrakis (difluoramino) methane — C(NF ) was
2 4
synthesized at Cyanamid by Frank, Firth, and Myers, and by Zol
linger at 3M. The former had fluorinated the NH adduct of PFG,
3
the latter had used the HOCN adduct.
All these compounds were difficult to make — only R ever achieved
synthesis in pound lots —and incredibly expensive. Their calculated
performances, with suitable fuels, was impressive enough, but their
sensitivity was even more so. None of them could be lived with.
The Hopeful Monoprops 173
Attempts were made to tranquilize them by mixing them with less
temperamental oxidizers, but the results were not happy. Wharton
worked for some time with a mixture of R and N O , and Aerojet
2 4
tried some mixtures (called "Moxy"), comprising R, N F and ClO F,
2 4 3
or A, N F and ClO F. But it was hopeless. When the NF oxidizer
2 4 3
was sufficiently diluted to be safe, all its performance advantage had
gone with the wind.
There was some thought that an OF structure attached to the car
bon would be more stable than the NF structure; and in 1963 W. C.
2
Solomon of 3M showed the way to such structures by reacting fluorine
with oxalates suspended in perfluorokerosene, in the presence of a
transition metal, to get F C(OF ) . Three years later, Professor George
2 2 2
Cady's group, at the University of Washington, synthesized the same
compound, neatly and elegantly, by reacting fluorine and carbon
dioxide, at room temperature, in the presence of cesium fluoride.
But the very mildness of the conditions for its synthesis showed that
it was too stable to be of much use as an oxidizer. And, finally, as has
been mentioned in the halogen chapter, the group at Allied Chemical,
reacted ONF with a perfluoro olefin, such as tetrafluoroethylene, to
3
get CF —CF —ONF or one of its cousins. But an ONF group
3 2 2 2
attached to a heavy and remarkably stable fluorocarbon residue isn't
very useful in the rocket business.
So in the long run, NF programs didn't lead to much in the way of
practical liquid propellants, brilliant as was some of the chemistry
exhibited. The record of this chemistry is now being collected, to be
embalmed safely in a definitive text, so that nobody will ever, ever,
have to risk his neck doing it again.
As for the original object of Principia: solid propellant grains con
taining NF groups have been made —and fired. But they have a long
2
way to go and if they are operational before 1980 or so I, for one, will
be surprised.
And as for the future of the high-energy monopropellants: I'm
afraid that it's in the past. We all worked for years trying to reconcile
properties which we finally and sadly concluded were irreconcilable —
high energy and stability. For all our efforts, no high energy monoprop
has made the grade to operational status. Cavea B almost made it,
but "almost" is not success. But it was a damned good try!
12
High Density and
the Higher Foolishness
The idea of a hybrid rocket, one using a solid fuel and a liquid oxi
dizer is a very old one; in fact, Oberth had tried to make one for UFA
back in 1929, and BMW had experimented with such a device during
1944-45. Configurations vary somewhat, but the usual arrangement
is a cylinder of fuel, solid except for a longitudinal passage down the
center line, fitted tightly into a cylindrical chamber. Oxidizer is in
jected at the upstream end, and reacts with the fuel as it travels down
the passage, and the combustion products eventually emerge through
the nozzle just downstream of the fuel grain. (Even if it weighs two
hundred pounds, it's still a "grain.")
On the face of it, the idea looks attractive. Solid fuels are denser
than liquid fuels, for one thing, and for another, the rocket can be
throttled just like a pure liquid device, while there is only one liquid
to handle. From the point of view of safety, it looks ideal, since there
just isn't any way for the fuel and the oxidizer to get together until
you want them to.
Soon after the end of the war, then, several organizations set out
confidently to design — and fire — hybrid rockets, and fell flat on their
corporate faces. The experience of GE (in 1952, on Project Hermes)
was typical. Their intention was to use a polyethylene fuel grain,
with hydrogen peroxide as the oxidizer. And when they fired their
rocket, the results were worse than depressing —they were disastrous.
Combustion was extremely poor, with a measured C* to make an
engineer weep. And when they tried to throttle their motor, the oxi-
dizer-fuel ration varied madly, and was never anywhere near the
High Density and the Higher Foolishness lib
optimum for performance. (This is hardly surprising, since the oxi
dizer consumption depends upon the rate at which it is injected,
while the fuel consumption depends on the area of the fuel grain
exposed.) And tinkering with the injector and the exact shape of the
fuel grain did very little good.
The engineers had been guilty of a sin to which engineers are
prone — starting their engineering before doing their research. For
it had become devastatingly clear that nobody knew how a solid fuel
burned. Did it evaporate, and then burn in the vapor phase? Or was a
solid-state reaction involved? Or what? There were lots of questions,
and very few answers, and hybrid work languished for some years.
Only the Navy, at NOTS, kept at it, trying to learn some of the
answers.
The revival started in 1959 when Lockheed, with an Army contract,
started hybrid work. In 1961 ARPA got into hybrids in a big way,
and by 1963 there were at least seven hybrid programs going.
I was greatly amused by the behavior of each new contractor as it
got into the act. The pattern was invariable. First, they would get
themselves a computer. Then, they would calculate the performance
of every conceivable liquid oxidizer with every conceivable solid fuel.
And then they would publish a huge report containing all the results
of all of these computations. And to the surprise of nobody who had
been in the business any length of time (we had all made these calcu
lations for ourselves years before) everybody came out with the same
numbers and recommended practically identical combinations. Thus,
the fuel grains recommended by three different contractors, Lock
heed, United Technology Co., and Aerojet, comprised:
1. Lithium hydride plus a hydrocarbon (rubber) binder;
2. Lithium hydride plus lithium metal plus a binder;
3. Lithium hydride plus powdered aluminum plus a binder.
And the oxidizers recommended (not necessarily in the same order)
consisted of:
1. Chlorine trifluoride plus perchloryl fluoride;
2. The same two plus bromine pentafluoride;
3. Or, plus N F ;
2 4
4. Or, finally, and a little further out, straight OF .
2
All of which made some of us wonder whether or not the taxpayer
had got his money's worth from all that expensive computer time.
Rohm and Haas investigated an entirely different type of hybrid,
one which would still burn and produce thrust even when the oxi-
176 Ignition
dizer was completely cut off. The grain consisted of aluminum pow
der, ammonium perchlorate, and a plastisol binder. (Plastisol is a
castable and quick-curing double-base mixture, consisting largely of
nitrocellulose and nitroglycerine, and was a solid propellant in its
own right.) Its combustion products included a large fraction of
hydrogen and carbon monoxide, and the liquid oxidizer, N O , was
2 4
intended to react with this and to increase the energy output and the
thrust. NOTS performed a long series of combustion studies with a
similar system, RFNA oxidizer and a fuel rich composite grain (am
monium perchlorate and a hydrocarbon or similar binder). As the
hybrid system is a compromise between a solid and a liquid system,
these and similar combinations can be considered as combining hy
brid and solid features.
Steve Tunkel at Reaction Motors investigated a much more esoteric
system in 1962-63 —a reverse hybrid in which the oxidizer was in the
grain, which consisted of nitronium perchlorate, NO ClO or hydra
2 4
zine di-perchlorate, N H (C10 ) , in a fluorocarbon (Teflon-type)
2 6 4 2
binder. The liquid fuel was hydrazine, and powdered aluminum or
boron could either be suspended in the fuel or incorporated into the
grain. The idea was to let the fluorine in the fluorocarbon react to
form aluminum or boron trifluoride, while the carbon was oxidized
to CO. (The other combustion products would depend upon the
exact grain composition, the fuel flow, and so on.) The idea was inter
esting, but their hopes were never realized. Nitronium perchlorate
turned out to be inherently unstable, for one thing, and Tunkel was
never able to achieve efficient fluorocarbon-metal combustion. The
system was just too precious to work.
Much more important, in the long run, was some of the work at
UTC, who had a Navy contract to investigate the basic mechanism of
hybrid combustion. (This, of course, should have been done at least
ten years earlier, and before a lot of money had been sunk into hy
brid work. But it's always easier to get money for engineering than for
fundamental research. Don't ask me why.)
Most of this work was done with a simplified model of a hybrid
motor, consisting of a flat slab of fuel with the oxidizer flowing across
its surface, the whole in a transparent chamber so that the investi
gators could see what was happening, and take pictures of it. The fuel
was usually polyethylene or methyl methacrylate (Plexiglass) and the
oxidizer was oxygen or OF . They learned that the oxidizer reacts
2
with the fuel only in the vapor phase, and that the rate was controlled
by diffusion, while the rate of regression (consumption) of the fuel
depended largely upon heat transfer from the hot reacting gases.
High Density and the Higher Foolishness 177
(This, of course, was not strictly true when the fuel grain contained
oxidizer of its own.) They learned that proper injector design could
keep the regression rate uniform across the whole grain surface,
but that the mixing of the fuel vapor and the oxidizer was so slow that
additional mixing volume downstream of the grain was usually
necessary to get reasonable combustion efficiency. This extra volume
did much to reduce the density advantage claimed for the hybrid
systems. But they learned how to build a hybrid motor that would
work vvith reasonable efficiency.
Thus, although all the work with the lithium hydride grains and the
chlorine trifiuoride oxidizers never led to anything in particular, the
fundamental research done at UTC led eventually to one hybrid
motor which is operational and flying —the UTC power plant of a
target drone. The oxidizer is N O , and the fuel is a very fuel-rich
2 4
composite solid propellant. A hybrid motor could be made and made
to work —but the hybrid was not the answer to everything, and its
place in the propulsion spectrum is, and will be, very limited.
The "Arcogels" were another attempted approach to a high-density
system. These were conceived in 1956 by the Atlantic Research Co.,
who worked on them for some five years. They were a mixture com
prising mainly powdered ammonium perchlorate, aluminum, and a
relatively nonvolatile liquid fuel and carrier, such as dibutyl phthalate.
They had the consistency, approximately, of toothpaste. They obvi
ously couldn't be brought into a chamber through a normal injector,
but had to be forced in through special burner tips, which spread the
pasty ribbon out to expose the maximum burning area. They burned
all right, at least on a small scale, but their high density wasn't enough
of an advantage to outweigh the horrendous problem of designing
an injection system that could be carried in a flyable missile, and they
never got anywhere.
All sorts of efforts were being made, during the late 50's, to increase
propellant densities, and I was responsible (not purposely, but from
being taken seriously when I didn't expect to be) for one of the
strangest. Phil Pomerantz, of BuWeps, wanted me to try dimethyl
mercury, Hg(CH ) , as a fuel. I suggested that it might be somewhat
3 2
toxic and a bit dangerous to synthesize and handle, but he assured
me that it was (a) very easy to put together, and (b) as harmless as
mother's milk. I was dubious, but told him that I'd see what I could do.
I looked the stuff up, and discovered that, indeed, the synthesis was
easy, but that it was extremely toxic, and a long way from harmless.
As I had suffered from mercury poisoning on two previous occasions
and didn't care to take a chance on doing it again, I thought that it
178 Ignition
would be an excellent idea to have somebody else make the compound
for me. So I phoned Rochester, and asked my contact man at Eastman
Kodak if they would make a hundred pounds of dimethyl mercury
and ship it to NARTS.
I heard a horrified gasp, and then a tightly controlled voice (I could
hear the grinding of teeth beneath the words) informed me that if
they were silly enough to synthesize that much dimethyl mercury,
they would, in the process fog every square inch of photographic
film in Rochester, and that, thank you just the same, Eastman was
not interested. The receiver came down with a crash, and I sat back
to consider the matter. An agonizing reappraisal seemed to be
indicated.
Phil wanted density. Well, dimethyl mercury was dense, all right —
d = 3.07 —but it would be burned with RFNA, and at a reasonable
mixture ratio the total propellant density would be about 2.1 or 2.2.
(The density of theacid-UDMH system is about 1.2.) That didn't seem
too impressive, and I decided to apply the reducto ad absurdum method.
Why not use the densest known substance which is liquid at room
temperature — mercury itself? Just squirt it into the chamber of a
motor burning, say, acid-UDMH. It would evaporate into a mon-
atomic gas (with a low C , which would help performance), and would
p
go out the nozzle with the combustion products. That technique
should give Phil all the density he wanted! Charmed by the delightful
nuttiness of the idea, I reached for the calculator.
For my calculations I used the monopropellant Cavea A, not only
because it had a good density by itself (1.5) but because it would be
simpler to handle two liquids than three in the wildly improbable
event that things ever got as far as motor work. I calculated the
performance of Cavea A with various proportions of mercury —up
to six times the mass of the primary propellant. (It was easy to fit
mercury into the NQD calculation method.) As expected, the spe
cific impulse dropped outrageously as mercury was added to the
system, but the density impulse (specific impulse X propellant density)
rose spectacularly, to peak at 50 percent above that of the neat mono
propellant with a mercury/propellant ratio of about 4.8.
The next thing was to set up the boost velocity equation: c =
b
c In (1 + <pd), and to plug in the results of the performance calcula
tions. I did this for various values of <p* plotting the percentage
increase in boost velocity over that produced by the neat propellant
* <p, as you may remember, is a loading factor: the propellant tank volume divided
by the dry mass (all propellants gone) of the missile. If there are ten kilograms of dry
mass per liter of tank volume, <p = 1/10, or 0.1.
High Density and the Higher Foolishness 179
against the percentage of the (fixed) tank volume filled with mercury
rather than propellant. The result was spectacular. With cp = 0.1,
and 27.5 percent of the tank volume filled with mercury instead of
propellant, the bulk density was 4.9 and the boost velocity was about
31 percent above that of the neat propellant; at cp = 0.2 there was a
20 percent increase with 21 volume percent of mercury. At <p = 1.0,
on the other hand, the best you could get was a 2 percent increase in
boost velocity with 5 volume percent of mercury. Obviously, a missile
with a low <p, such as an air-to-air job, was where this system belonged
— if anywhere.
I solemnly and formally wrote the whole thing up, complete with
graphs, labeled it —dead pan —the "Ultra High Density Propellant
Concept," and sent it off to the Bureau. I expected to see it bounce
back in a week, with a "Who do you think you're kidding?" letter
attached. It didn't.
Phil bought it.
He directed us, forthwith, to verify the calculations experimentally,
and NARTS, horrified, was stuck with the job of firing a mercury-
spewing motor in the middle of Morris County, New Jersey.
Firing the motor wouldn't be any problem; the problem lay in the
fact that all of the mercury vapor in the atmosphere would not be
good for the health of the (presumably) innocent inhabitants of the
county —nor for our own. So a scrubber had to be built, a long pipe
like affair down which the motor would be fired, and fitted with water
sprays, filters, and assorted devices to condense and collect the mer
cury in the exhaust before it could get out into the atmosphere. We
had it built and were about ready to go, when the Navy decided to
shut down —"disestablish" —NARTS, and ordered us to ship the
whole mercury setup to NOTS. With a sigh of relief, we complied,
and handed them the wet baby. Saved by the bell!
At NOTS, Dean Couch and D. G. Nyberg took over the job, and
by March 1960 had completed their experiments. They used a 250-
pound thrust RFNA-UDMH motor, and injected mercury through
a tap in the chamber wall. And the thing did work. They used up to
31 volume percent of mercury in their runs, and found that at 20
percent they got a 40 percent increase in density impulse. (I had
calculated 43.) As they were firing in the middle of the desert, they
didn't bother with the scrubber. And they didn't poison a single
rattlesnake. Technically, the system was a complete success. Prac
tically—that was something else again.
A more practical way to get a high-density system (or so people
thought) was to use a metallized fuel, one with a light metal suspended
180 Ignition
in it. As we have seen, this was an old idea, going back at least to 1929.
BMW in Germany tried it about 1944, without noticeable success,
and Dave Horvitz at Reaction Motors made a long series of tests, in
1947-51, burning a 10 to 20 percent suspension of powdered alumi
num in gasoline, with liquid oxygen. Again, his success was not spec
tacular. It was difficult to get decent combustion efficiency, and a good
part of the metal never burned at all, but was exhausted unchanged
out the nozzle. Designing an injector which would handle a suspen
sion wasn't easy, particularly as the viscosity of the suspension varied
outrageously with temperature. And if the mixture stood around a
while, the aluminum had a strong tendency to settle to the bottom of
the tank.
So, although Boeing, in 1953, considered using a suspension of
magnesium in jet fuel, and burning it with WFNA (the project never
got anywhere) interest in such things languished for some years.
What revived it, late in the 50's, was a safety problem.
The Navy had always been reluctant to store loaded liquid rockets
in the magazines of its beloved airplane carriers. What would happen
if one of them sprung a leak, and disgorged a load of highly corrosive
oxidizer, or highly inflammable fuel (or even worse, both of them!)
onto the magazine deck? The point being, of course, that below decks
on a carrier ventilation is difficult, and furthermore, aboard ship
there's no place to run. Somebody — nobody now remembers who it
was — came up with the idea that if the propellants were gelled — given
the consistency of a not particularly stiff gelatine dessert—leakage
would be extremely slow, and the situation would be manageable. As
for the problem of injecting a gelled propellant, that could be solved
by making the gel thixotropic. Whereupon everybody concerned
demanded an explanation of that word.
A thixotropic gel, or "thixotrope," is a peculiar beast. Left to itself,
it sets up to a comparatively stiff jelly, and if it is pushed gently it
resists and flows very slowly, as though its viscosity were very high.
If, however, it is subjected to a large force, as it would be if shaken
violently, or forced under high pressure through an injector, its
resistance suddenly collapses as though it had decided to relax and
enjoy it, its viscosity drops precipitously, and it flows like a civilized
liquid. A thixotropic propellant, then, would reduce the leakage
hazard, while still being injectable.*
* A jellied, or thixotropic, fuel is much less of a fire hazard than the straight liquid
ir il is spilled. It evaporates and burns much more slowly, and doesn't have a tendency
to spread the fire all over the surroundings. Considerable work has been done, recently,
on applying the principle to jet fuel in commercial airliners, to reduce the fire hazard
in case of a crash.
High Density and the Higher Foolishness 181
As it turned out, it wasn't particularly difficult to turn most of the
common propellants into thixotropes. Five percent of so of finely
divided silica would do it to nitric acid, and the hydrazines could
usually be gelled the same way or by the addition of a small percentage
of certain cellulose derivatives. And the results could be fired, although
filling the tank beforehand was a frustrating and infuriating job.
Combustion efficiency left something to be desired, and the dead
weight of the silica naturally reduced the performance; but the system
could be made to work—more or less. The real trouble showed up
when an attempt was made to gel the halogen oxidizers. Silica, obvi
ously, was impossible, as were the carbohydrate cellulose type agents.
At Aeroprojects they tried to gel a mixture of ClF and BrF with a
3 5
pyrolytic carbon black, and thought that they had solved the problem,
particularly when the gelled mixture showed a card-gap value of
zero cards. I was dubious about the whole thing though, and warned
their Bill Tarpley and Dana McKinney that the system was inherently
unstable, and that they were hunting for trouble. Unfortunately, I
was proved right almost immediately. Fred Gaskins, was working
with some of the material late in 1959, when it detonated. He lost
an eye and a hand, and suffered fluorine burns which would have
killed most people. Somehow, he survived, but that was the end of the
attempt to mix interhalogens and carbon black. Later attempts used
completely fluorinated substances, such as SbF , for the gelling
5
agent. Unfortunately, an inordinate amount of the agent was re
quired to do the job.
A few years later, gelling appeared to be the answer to another
problem, that of propellant sloshing in space vehicles. If, for some
reason, the propellant in a partly full tank starts to slosh back and
forth, the center of gravity of the rocket will shift in an unpredictable
manner, and directional and attitude control can be lost. A gelled
propellant, obviously, isn't subject to sloshing, and in 1965 A. J.
Beardell of Reaction Motors, then investigating the diborane/OF
2
system for deep space work, looked into the problem of gelling OF .
2
He found that he could do it with finely divided LiF, which, of course,
would not react with the oxidizer. However, since several percent of
LiF were needed to form the gel, the performance was appreciably
degraded. R. H. Globus of Aerojet discovered a much more elegant
solution to the problem three years later. He simply bubbled gaseous
ClF through liquid OF . The chlorine trifluoride froze instantly to
3 2
micropscopic crystals which acted as the gelling agent. Five or 6
percent of the additive made a very fine gel, and the effect on per
formance was microscopic. For some reason or other, ClF wouldn't
5
work.
182 Ignition
The gelled propellants revived the interest in metallized fuels.
Many people thought that, by gelling a fuel, it might be possible to
load it up with 50 percent or so of aluminum, or boron, or perhaps
even beryllium —if you could ever get your hands on enough of the
last —without having the metal settle out. It was soon discovered, too,
that if your metal were finely enough divided, with particle sizes of
the order of a micrometer, so that the Van der Waals forces became
important, it would itself tend to gel the mixture. So there was a
great burst of effort and people all over the country started to in
vestigate the rheological properties of various metallized slurries
(these have no gelling agent besides the metal), gels, and even emul
sions. (These have two liquid phases —like mayonnaise —besides the
metal.) Most of the investigators used Ferranti-Shirley viscosimeters,
which can measure the viscosity of such substances as a function of
the shear rate. (I was always getting the name confused with "Ferrari,"
which is not unreasonable, since not only the names, but also the
prices were similar.)
These investigators discovered that making a stable gel or slurry
was not a science, but a black art, accomplished reliably only with the
aid of witchcraft, and that getting two batches of gel with the same
rheology was a miracle. But they persisted and in the early 60's
several mixtures were ready for test firing.
Boron, aluminum, and beryllium were the metals investigated.
Reaction Motors came up with a slurry of boron in a hydrocarbon,
intended to be used in a ram-rocket, with chlorine trifluoride as the
primary oxidizer. The idea was to maximize the propellant density,
and since BF is a gas, combustion problems were not serious. Most of
3
the work, however, was directed towards aluminized fuels, and
Rocketdyne, as early as 1962, had fired an aluminum-hydrazine
mixture with N O . It contained almost 50 percent of aluminum, and
2 4
they called it "Alumizine." It was designed for an improved Titan
II, but, although they have been working on it ever since, it hasn't yet
become operational. Reaction Motors fired an aluminized hydrazine-
hydrocarbon emulsion with N O two years later, but it, too, has
2 4
failed to make the grade. And although the Naval Ordnance Test
Station has fired their "Notsgel" (aluminum in gelled hydrazine
mixtures) successfully many times, it hasn't yet found an application.*
* One of their hydrazine mixtures was a three to one mix of monomethyl hydrazine
and ethylene di-hydrazine. This has a freezing point of—61°, and the viscosity of the
EDH improves the stability of the gel. This is one of the few propellant applications
thai EDH has found to dale.
High Density and the Higher Foolishness 183
And there have been other aluminized fuels, but none of them are
ready for operational use.
In my own opinion, it will be a long time before they are operational,
if they ever are. For the problems are horrendous. They come in two
sorts, those arising when you try to store the fuels, and those which
show up when you try to fire them, and it's hard to say which resist
solution more stubbornly.
A shelf life of five years is specified for a prepackaged missile, and
a lot of things can happen to a metallized gel in five years, particularly
if the storage temperature varies considerably during that time —as
it would if the missile were stored out of doors —or if it is subjected
to vibration, which it is certain to be if it is shipped from point A to
point B. There is always the tendency for the metal to settle out, and
this tendency is abetted by wide temperature variations, which dras
tically and sometimes irreversibly change the rheology of the gel.
And vibration, of course, has a tendency to reduce the viscosity, of a
thixotropic gel, temporarily, of course, but possibly long enough to
permit appreciable sedimentation. Or syneresis —a peculiar vice to
which some gels are addicted —may set in. If this happens, the gel
starts to shrink and to squeeze the liquid out of its structure, and the
end of the process may be a comparatively small volume of a very
dense and stiff solid phase surrounded by a volume of clear liquid.
None of these things may happen —but on the other hand, they may
— and the state of the art has not advanced to the point at which one
can be assured that a metallized gel will survive, unchanged, five
years of storage in climates ranging from that of Point Barrow to that
of the Mojave Desert.
Most of the gels and slurries which have been considered have been
based on hydrazine or hydrazine mixtures, which fact is the cause of
another —and very peculiar —problem. Missile tanks are usually
made of very pure aluminum. But there are always some impurities,
and some of these impurities are likely to be transition metals such
as iron which catalyze the decomposition of hydrazine. However, if
the concentration of the catalytic metals is only some parts per million,
very few of the offending atoms will be on the tank surface itself,
where they can make trouble, and the decomposition and gas evolu
tion will be negligible. However, if the hydrazine is loaded with very
finely divided aluminum, the surface volume ratio of the metal will
be increased by many orders of magnitude, as will be the number of
catalytic atoms in contact with the hydrazine. Under these circum
stances, the decomposition is increased enormously, and even if it is
insufficient to change the composition of the fuel appreciably in a
184 Ignition
reasonable length of time, the accompanying gas evolution can have
serious, and disconcerting, results. For the gas cannot escape from
the gel, which thereupon swells up exactly like a cheese souffle. And
try to run that through an injector!
Assuming, however, that the storage problems have been coped
with, somehow, the operational problems remain. The first of these
is that of forcing the fuel out of its tank. If a metallized gel is pressur
ized—that is, high pressure gas is let into the tank to force the fuel
out —a sort of tunneling process takes place. The gas simply blows a
hole for its own passage down through the gel to the outlet, and
leaves most of the fuel untouched and sitting quietly around the
sides of the tank, instead of flowing, as it should, through the feed
line to the motor. The fuel has to be completely enclosed, as in a
flexible bladder (to which the expulsion pressure is applied), or a
large fraction of it simply won't leave the tank. Once the fuel leaves
the tank, the rate at which it flows through the fuel line and the
injector into the motor is strongly dependent on its viscosity, and the
viscosity of a metallized gel varies madly with the temperature. Since
the viscosity of the oxidizer doesn't vary nearly as much, the result
of this is that the mixture ratio if you fire the motor at —40° will be
quite unlike that which you will get if you fire it at +25° —and it
certainly won't be the one that you want.
Then, once the fuel is in the motor — and I won't go into the prob
lem of designing an injector which will disperse a gel properly —
there's the problem of burning the aluminum. Unless the chamber
temperature is well above the melting point of aluminum oxide (about
2050°) or, preferably above the considerably higher temperature
at which it decomposes, the aluminum particle will simply coat itself
with a layer of solid or liquid alumina, and refuse to burn to comple
tion. When burned with N O the chamber temperature is just about
2 4
high enough to burn an aluminized gel properly. It's highly probable
that combustion with nitric acid would be marginal, with a chamber
temperature not quite high enough to make the metal burn to com
pletion. (With a halogen oxidizer, such as ClF , this particular problem
3
doesn't arise, since AlF is a gas at the temperatures we're talking
3
about.) And, naturally, the dense clouds of solid Al O resulting from
2 3
the combustion of an aluminized gel leave a very conspicuous exhaust
trail.
There is one final problem which should be mentioned — final
because it comes up when the motor is shut down. The heat from the
hot motor soaks back into the injector, and the gel in the injector holes
sets up to something resembling reinforced concrete, which has to be
High Density and the Higher Foolishness 185
drilled out before the motor can be fired again. So, restarts are out of
the question.
The problems with beryllium-loaded gels are the same as those with
aluminized ones, only more so, and with one or two peculiar to them
selves. The exhausted BeO, of course, is violently poisonous, produc
ing something resembling a galloping silicosis, but the most serious
problem is in the combustion. Beryllium oxide melts at a considerably
higher temperature than does aluminum oxide, and doesn't vaporize
until the temperature is near 4000°, so that burning it is even more
difficult than burning aluminum. Rosenberg, at Aerojet, burned a
beryllium-hydrazine slurry ("Beryllizine") with hydrogen peroxide
in 1965, and got a C* efficiency of some 70 percent, which indicated
that none of the beryllium had burned. At Rocketdyne, they had the
same experience with the combination. When Rosenberg used N O
2 4
as his oxidizer, his C* efficiency was some 85 percent, showing that
some of the metal had burned. His performance was particularly bad
at what should have been the optimum mixture ratio. Various ex
pedients designed to improve combustion, such as vapor-coating the
beryllium powder with chromium, didn't improve the situation
appreciably.
Aluminum hydride was a compound that aroused a flurry of inter
est in the early 60's. It had long been known, but not as pure or rela
tively pure AlH , since it had always been prepared solvated with
3
ether, which couldn't be removed without decomposing the hydride.
However, Dow Chemical and Metal Hydrides, late in 1959 or early
in 1960, devised methods of obtaining it without ether, and Olin
Mathieson soon made important contributions to the synthetic
methods. Its intended use was as an ingredient in solid propellants,
but the liquid people tried to use it in gels. It wasn't sufficiently stable,
but reacted with the hydrazines, evolving hydrogen in the process,
so the idea was soon abandoned.
Beryllium hydride, BeH had more staying power. It had been
2
known since 1951, but again, in an impure state. In 1962, however,
G. E. Coates and I. Glocking of the Ethyl Corporation managed to
prepare it in a fairly pure (about 90 percent) state. It, too, was in
tended for solid propellant use. It was nicknamed "Beane" (pro
nounced "beany"), as a security measure. (A little later it was dis
covered that its stability could be improved by heating it, and the
result was called "Baked Beane.") But code name or no, the secret
was soon out. I was in Dick Holzmann's office in the Pentagon when
an assistant came in with the latest issue of Missiles and Rockets. And
there was BeH , spread all over the page. It appears that a congress-
2
186 Ignition
man who wanted to show how knowledgeable he was had blown secur
ity and had told a reporter everything he knew. I have heard —and
used — some spectacular language in my time, but Holzmann's remarks
were a high point in the history of oral expression.
Naturally, the liquid people had to see if BeH could be used in a
2
gel. It appeared to be much more stable than aluminum hydride,
particularly when it was in the amorphous, rather than the crystalline,
state. Rocketdyne reported that the former reacted very little even
with water. Texaco, Aerojet, and Rocketdyne investigated it in mono-
methyl hydrazine gels between 1963 and 1967. Aerojet claimed the
mixture was stable, but Rocketdyne's gel, which had some straight
hydrazine in it, displayed the souffle syndrome. Its longtime stability
in hydrazine appears very doubtful; certainly it is thermodynamically
unstable.
With liquids which do not have active hydrogens, the situation is
different. Grelecki at Reaction Motors, in 1966, made a 55 percent
slurry of BeH in dodecane, and burned it with hydrogen peroxide,
2
getting good combustion and a high C* efficiency. That same year the
Ethyl Corporation made an apparently stable slurry of the material
with pentaborane, and Gunderlory, at Rocketdyne, has investigated
mixtures of the hydride with his beryllium semiliquids.
However, even if they are stable —and not all counties have been
heard from —BeH gels and slurries don't appear to be the wave of
2
the future. The toxicity of the exhaust and the high price of the
propellant appear to rule them out as far as tactical missiles are con
cerned, and there doesn't seem to be any other role for them that
can't be filled better by something else.
A rather far-out concept, even in the fields of gels and slurries and
monopropellants, is that of the heterogeneous monopropellant —a
solid fuel slurried or gelled in a liquid oxidizer. The Midwest Research
Institute came up with the first of these in 1958, when they suspended
powdered polyethylene in RFNA. Unfortunately, its sensitivity was
more than 120 cards, and it was thermally unstable to boot, so it was
hurriedly abandoned before anybody got hurt. About five years later
Reaction Motors introduced a similar mixture, with boron carbide,
B C suspended in a special high density RFNA containing about 40
4
percent N O . This was insensitive to the card-gap test, but was
2 4
thermally unstable, and it, too, had to be junked. In 1965 they tried
mixing boron carbide with ClF (!), and found that it was apparently
5
stable at 65°, although there was some reaction at first when the two
compounds were mixed. Nevertheless, apparently remembering
what had happened to Fred Gaskins, they didn't carry their experi-
High Density and the Higher Foolishness 187
ments any further. And for some years Rocket Research Co., a small
organization in Seattle, has been industriously plugging "Monex," a
mixture of powdered aluminum, hydrazine, hydrazine nitrate, and
water, and, ignorant of or ignoring the work on hydrazine and hydra
zine nitrate done nearly twenty years before at NOTS, claiming an
outstanding and original contribution to rocketry. Recently they have
been experimenting with beryllium instead of aluminum. Combus
tion efficiency with these propellants, particularly the beryllium-based
ones, is bound to be bad, since the chamber temperature is compara
tively low. Rocketdyne, in 1966, did some work with similar beryllium
mixtures, with no notable success. The heterogeneous monopropel-
lants can only be considered an aberration, off the main line of pro-
pellant development, and highly unlikely ever to lead to anything
useful. About all it proves is the willingness of rocket people to try
anything, no matter how implausible, if they can con NASA or one of
the services into paying for it.
This may explain the work on the "Tribrid" (an etymological mon
strosity, if there ever was one!). These are propellant systems involving
three propellants, and the name derives vaguely from "hybrid."
Sometimes the term "tripropellant" is used. Performance calculations
made in the early 60's showed that for space use, there were two pro
pellant systems whose specific impulses exceeded those of any other
system that could be dreamed up — and exceeded them by a spectacu
lar margin. The first of these was the Be-O-H system, in which the
beryllium was burned to BeO by the oxygen, and the hydrogen pro
vided the working fluid. It started to arouse considerable interest in
1963 or so, and Atlantic Research and Aerojet started programs de
signed to prove it out.
Atlantic Research's approach was an extension of the hybrid system.
Powdered beryllium was made into a solid grain with the help of a
small amount of hydrocarbon binder. This was burned, as in a hybrid,
with the oxygen, and then hydrogen was fed into the chamber down
stream of the grain. (In a variant arrangement, some of it was intro
duced upstream with the oxygen, and the rest farther down.) A
scrubber was needed, of course, to take the BeO out of the exhaust
stream — and the totality of the precautions taken to avoid poisoning
the bystanders was fantastic. In any case, although the motor could be
and was fired, combustion efficiency was extremely poor, and the
system never, practically, approached its theoretical potential.
G. M. Beighley, at Aerojet, tried another approach, this one re
sembling the usual bi-propellant arrangement. His two propellants
were liquid hydrogen and a slurry of powdered beryllium metal in
188 Ignition
liquid oxygen. He was able to report his results by 1966, and they were
not encouraging. He never got more than 70 percent combustion
efficiency, and was plagued by "burnbacks" of his Be-O slurry
2
through the injector. It's really surprising that he didn't manage to
kill himself.
At any rate, he didn't continue the work, and as little has been heard
of the Be-H-O system in the last few years, it is probably dead.
When the combustion difficulties are added to the toxicity of BeO and
the price of beryllium, there isn't really much point in continuing
with it.
The Li-F-H system looks much more promising, and has been
investigated rather thoroughly by Rocketdyne. Here, two approaches
are possible. Lithium has a low melting point for a metal—179° —so
it is possible to inject lithium, fluorine, and hydrogen into the motor,
all as liquids, in a true tripropellant system. Or, the lithium can be
slurried in the hydrogen, so that the motor can be run as a bi-propel-
lant system. Rocketdyne started investigating Li-H gels in 1963,
2
and three years later Bill Tarpley and Dana McKinney of Technidyne
(Aeroprojects renamed) reported gelling liquid hydrogen with lithium
and with lithium borohydride. Satisfactory and stable gels were pro
duced with 61.1 weight percent (17.4 volume percent) of lithium or
58.8 weight percent (13.3 volume percent) of lithium borohydride.
The evaporation rate of the hydrogen was reduced by a factor of 2 or
3, and gelling the fuel eliminated the propellant sloshing problem.
Their work was, however, only on the liter scale, and in the mean
time Rocketdyne went ahead with the other approach, and fired the
combination in a true tripropellant motor. They used liquid lithium
and liquid fluorine, but used gaseous hydrogen instead of liquid. I
presume that they considered that handling two such hairy liquids as
fluorine and lithium at the same time was enough, without adding to
their misery by coping with liquid hydrogen. I have described some
of the problems associated with liquid fluorine, and liquid lithium has
its own collection of headaches. You have to keep it hot, or it will
freeze in the propellant lines. You must also keep it from contact with
the atmosphere, or it will burst into brilliant and practically inex
tinguishable flame. Add to this the fact that liquid lithium is highly
corrosive to most metals, and that it is incompatible with anything you
might want to use for gaskets and sealing materials (it even attacks
Teflon with enthusiasm), and you have problems.
But somehow the Rocketdyne crew (H. A. Arbit, R. A. Dickerson,
S. D. Clapp, and C. K. Nagai) managed to overcome them, and made
their firings. They worked at 500 psi chamber pressure, with a high
High Density and the Higher Foolishness 189
expansion nozzle (exit area/throat area = 60) designed for space
work. Their main problem stemmed from the high surface tension
of liquid lithium, orders of magnitude higher than that of ordinary
propellants, which made it difficult to design an injector that would
produce droplets of lithium small enough to burn completely before
going out the nozzle. Once this problem was overcome, their results
were spectacular. Using lithium and fluorine alone (no hydrogen)
their maximum specific impulse was 458 seconds. But when they
proportioned the lithium and fluorine to burn stoichiometrically to
LiF, and injected hydrogen to make up 30 percent of the mass flow,
they measured 542 seconds —probably the highest measured specific
impulse ever attained by anything except a nuclear motor. And the
chamber temperature was only 2200 K! Performance like that is
worth fighting for. The beryllium-burning motor is probably a lost
cause, but the lithium-fluorine-hydrogen system may well have a
bright future.
13
What Happens Next
The absolute limit to the performance of a chemical rocket, even in
space, appears to be somewhere below 600 seconds. This is a frustrat
ing situation, and various far-out methods of cracking this barrier
have been suggested. One is to use free radicals or unstable species
as propellants, and to use the energy of their reversion to the stable
state for propulsion. For instance, when two atoms of hydrogen com
bine to form one molecule of H , some 100 kilocalories of energy are
2
released per two-gram mole. This means that a 50-50 (by weight)
mixture of monatomic hydrogen and ordinary hydrogen would have
a performance of some 1000-1100 seconds. That is, it would if (A)
you could make that much monatomic hydrogen and could mix it
with ordinary hydrogen and (B) if you could keep it from reverting
immediately to H ->• in a catastrophic manner. So far, nobody has the
2
foggiest idea of how to do either one. Free radicals such as CH and
3
OOF can be made, and can be trapped in a matrix of, say, frozen
argon, whose mass is so great compared to that of the captured radi
cals that the whole idea is a farce as far as propulsion is concerned.
Texaco for one has been investigating such trapping phenomena
and the electronic states in the trapped molecular fragment for several
years, but the whole program, interesting as it is academically, must
I)C classified as a waste of the taxpayers' money if it is claimed to be
oriented toward propulsion. To quote a mordant remark heard at
one meeting, "The only people who have had any luck at trapping
free radicals are the FBI."
So it appears that the only practical way to increase the specific
What Happens Next 191
impulse in large-thrust applications is to shift to the nuclear rocket,
which, fortunately, works and is well on the way toward operational
status. (Ionic and other electrical thrusters are useful only in low-
thrust applications, and are outside the scope of this book —and of
my competence to describe them.) So the chemical rocket is likely
to be with us for some time.
And here are my guesses as to which liquid propellants are going
to be used during the next few years, and possibly for the rest of the
century, although here I'm sticking my neck out a long way.
For short-range tactical missiles, with a range up to 500 km or so,
it will be RFNA-UDMH, gradually shifting over to something like
ClF and a hydrazine-type fuel. Monopropellants are unlikely to be
5
used for main propulsion, and the problems with gels and slurries
are so great that it is unlikely that the benefits to be derived from them
can outweigh the difficulty of developing them to operational status.
For long-range strategic missiles, the Titan II combination, N O
2 4
and a hydrazine mixture will continue in use. The combination is a
howling success, and if somebody wants to put a bigger warhead on
the brute —I can't see why —it would be a lot simpler just to build a
bigger Titan than to develop a new propellant system.
For the big first-stage space boosters we will continue to use liquid
oxygen and RP-1 or the equivalent. They work and they're cheap —
and Saturn V uses a lot of propellant! Later, we may shift to hydrogen
as a first-stage fuel, but it appears unlikely. The development of a
reusable booster won't change the picture, but if a ram-rocket booster
is developed all bets are off.
For the upper stages, the hydrogen-oxygen combination of the
J-2 is very satisfactory, and will probably be used for a long time.
Later, as more energy is needed, there may be a shift, for the final
stage, to hydrogen-fluorine or hydrogen-lithium-fluorine. The nu
clear rocket will take over there.
For lunar landers, service modules, and the like, N O and a hydra
2 4
zine fuel seem likely to remain useful for a long time. I can't think of
any combination likely to displace them in the foreseeable future.
Deep space probes, working at low temperatures, will probably use
methane, ethane, and diborane for fuels, although propane is a
possibility. The oxidizers will be OF , and possibly ONF and NO F,
2 3 2
while perchloryl fluoride, ClO F, would be useful as far out as Jupiter.
3
I see no place for beryllium in propulsion, nor any role for N F
2 4
or NF . Perchloryl fluoride may, as I've mentioned, have some use in
3
space, and as an oxygen-bearing additive for ClF , which will probably
6
displace ClF entirely. Pentaborarie and decaborane and their de-
3
192 Ignition
rivatives will, as far as liquid propulsion is concerned, revert to their
former decent obscurity. Hydrogen peroxide will continue to be used,
as a monopropellant, for attitude control and in other low-thrust
applications. It will probably not be used as an oxidizer for main
propulsion.
This is the picture, as I see it in my somewhat clouded crystal ball.
It may be wrong in detail, but I believe that, on the whole, it won't
appear too far out of drawing twenty years from now. There appears
to be little left to do in liquid propellant chemistry, and very few
important developments to be anticipated. In short, we propellant
chemists have worked ourselves out of a job. The heroic age is over.
But it was great fun while it lasted.
Glossary
A "Compound A," ClF .
5
A-4 German ballistic missile that was used to bombard
London, also called V-2.
AN Ammonium nitrate, or amine nitrate monopropellant.
ARIB Aeronautical Research Institute, at Braunschweig.
ARPA Advanced Research Projects Administration.
ARS American Rocket Society. Joined with the Institute of
Aeronautical Sciences to form the American Institute
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, AIAA.
BECCO Buffalo Electrochemical Company.
BMW Bavarian Motor Works.
BuAer Bureau of Aeronautics, U.S. Navy. Later combined
with Bureau of Ordnance, BuOrd, to form Bureau of
Weapons, BuWeps.
CTF Chlorine tri fluoride, ClF .
3
EAFB Edwards Air Force Base, in the Mojave Desert, Cal
ifornia.
EES Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis (Navy).
ERDE Explosives Research and Development Establishment,
at Waltham Abbey, England.
Flox Mixture of liquid oxygen and liquid fluorine. A num
ber following, as in Flox 30, indicates the percentage
of fluorine.
nOTE. Temperatures are given in degrees Celsium (Centigrade) unless otherwise
specified.
194 Ignition
FMC Food Machines and Chemical Company.
GALCIT Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, California In
stitute of Technology.
GE General Electric Company.
ICBM Intercontinental Ballistic Missile.
IITRI Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute,
formerly the Armour Research Institute.
IR Infra Red.
IRBM Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile.
IRFNA Inhibited Red Fuming Nitric Acid.
IWFNA Inhibited White Fuming Nitric Acid.
JATO Jet assisted take-off — rocket for boosting overloaded
airplanes into the air.
JP Jet Propellant, kerosene type. A number following, as
JP-4, indicated a particular specification.
JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, operated by CaI
Tech.
X (Lambda) A measure of the oxygen balance in a propellant or
4C + H
combination of propellants. A = —^K—, where C, H,
and O are the number of moles of carbon, hydrogen
and oxygen in the combination, and equals the ratio of
reducing to oxidizing valences.
LFPL Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory, Cleveland, a
NACA-NASA facility.
LOX Liquid oxygen.
LRPL See NARTS.
MAF Mixed amine fuel. Number following indicates type.
Reaction Motors mixture.
MHF Mixed hydrazine fuel. Number following indicates
type. Reaction Motors mixture.
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
MMH Monomethyl hydrazine.
MON Mixed oxides of nitrogen, N O -I- NO. Number follow
2 4
ing indicates percentage NO.
NAA North American Aviation.
NACA National Advisory Council on Aeronautics. Became
NASA.
NARTS Naval Air Rocket Test Station, Lake Denmark, Dover,
New Jersey. In 1960 taken over by Army, and became
Liquid Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, LRPL, of Pica-
tinny Arsenal.
Glossary 195
NASA National Aeronautical and Space Administration.
NOL Naval Ordnance Laboratory, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOTS Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, California,
often referred to as Inyokern.
NPN Normal Propyl Nitrate.
NUOS Naval Underwater Ordnance Station, formerly Naval
Torpedo Station, Newport, Rhode Island.
NYU New York University.
O/F The ratio of the oxidizer flow to the fuel flow in a liquid
rocket.
ONR Office of Naval Research.
PF Perchloryl Fluoride, ClO F.
3
R&D Research 8c Development.
RFNA Red Fuming Nitric Acid.
RMD See RMI.
ROR Rocket on Rotor, used to improve the performance of a
helicopter.
RMI Reaction Motors, Inc., later became RMD, Reaction
Motors Division of Thiocal Chemical Co. Died late in
1969.
SAM Surface to Air Missile.
SFNA Stable Fuming Nitric Acid (obsolete).
Tonka German rocket fuels based on xylidines.
TRW Thompson Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation.
UDMH Unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine.
UFA German moving picture company of the 1920's and
1930's.
USP United States Pharmacopea.
UTC United Technology Corporation, a subsidiary of United
Airlines.
V-2 The propaganda name for A-4.
VfR Verein fur Raurnschiffart, the old German Rocket
Society.
Visol. German rocket fuels based on vinyl ethers.
WADC Wright Air Development Center, Dayton, Ohio; Air
Force installation.
WFNA White Fuming Nitric Acid.
Index
research, 23, 40-41, 42-43, 56, 63,
106; borohydrides, 128; borane,
A. See Compound A 124, 127-128; deep space rock
A-4. See German ballistic missile ets, 86; hybrid propellants, 175,
(A-4) 181, 185, 186, 187-188; hydra
Abramson, Bert, 74, 139, 143 zines, 128; liquid fluorine, 110;
Acid(s) liquid hydrogen, 107; monopro-
ignition and reactions with bonds, pellants, 136, 137, 144, 152,
31 160-161, 173; oxidizers, 82
See also specific acid Aeronautical Research Institute,
Acetic anhydride, WFNA freezing Braunschweig (ARIB); 13, 15
point and, 50 Aeroprojects, hybrid propellant re
Acetonitrile search, 181, 188
decaborane plus hydrazine and, as Aerozine-50, 45
monopropellant, 159-160 Agena motor, fuel for, 63
as hydrazine additive, 45, 159-160 Ahlert, Bob, 160, 164
tetranitromethane plus, as mono Air Products, monopropellant re
propellant, 147-148 search, 146, 147
Acetylene, 35 Air Reduction Company
liquid hydrogen plus, as monopro monopropellant research, 133,
pellant, 147w 163
oxygen-ammonia system and, 104 ozone work, 112, 113-114
research with derivatives, 34, 35, propellant production, 37
36-37, 133 Alcohol(s)
Advanced Research Projects Admin additives and heat flux, 106
istration (ARPA), "Project Prin- aniline and RFNA plus, use of, 27
cipia," 167, 168, 173, 175 hypergolicity studies, 30
Aerojet Engineering liquid oxygen plus, use of, 103,106,
founding, 22-23 117
198 Ignition
Akohol(s) (cone) Ammonium borohydride, 128
for long-range ballistic missiles, 25 Ammonium nitrate, 135
See also specific alcohol hydrogen peroxide plus, 69
Alkyl borane derivatives, research WFNA freezing point and, 50
on, 123, 124 Ammonium thiocyanate, 41
Allied Chemical and Dye Company Amster, A. B., 109
research, 56 Aniline, 15, 16
monopropellants, 146, 169 alcohols and, 27, 30
oxidizers, 84, 85 disadvantages of, 21
Altman, Dave, 23 freezing point depression, 21, 22
Aluminum additives, 9 hydrazine plus, 41
for high-density fuels, 180 methylamine plus, 41
in gasoline, 18 RFNA plus, 20, 27; disadvantages
in gelled propellants, 182-183; of, 26; JATO and, 20, 21
problems with, 183-184, 185 spontaneous ignition, 14
in hydrazine, 187; decomposition Aoki, Kenneth, 158-159
and, 183-184 Apollo service engine, 63
for oxygen motor starts, 106 Arbit, H. A., 188-189
Aluminum borohydrides, 128, 129 "Arcogels," 177
Aluminum hydrides, 185 Argon fluoride, 73ra
"Alumizine," 182 Armour Research Institute. See Illi
American Cyanamide Company re nois Institute of Technology Re
search, 21, 22, 167 search Institute (IITRI)
American Interplanetary Society, 6 Arnold, General Henry Harley
American Rocket Society (ARS), 21 ("Hap"), 11, 13
Amines, 34, 37-39, 115 Arnold, Weld, 10
hypergolicity of, 15, 30 Armstrong, Don, 40-41, 128
mixed amine fluid (MAF), 194 Aston, 43
nitrate salts: as monopropellants, Atlantic Research Company, 177,
137-145, 147, 148-151, 153- 187
158; structure-sensitivity rela Atlas missile, 105, 106
tions, 150n Atzwanger, 80
tertiary, 38-39 Audrieth, 40
See also specific amine
Ammonia
additives and heat flux, 106 B
ammonium nitrate plus, 18
chlorine trifluoride and, 74, 75 Ball, Harry W., 10
fuming nitric acid and, 27 Barrett, Wayne, 156
hydrazine and, 40 Barrick, P. L., 108
hypergolicity studies, 27-28 Barsh, Max, 152
liquid fluorine plus, 110 Barth-Wehrenalp, 80, 81
liquid oxygen plus, 104, 106 Bartlett, Neil, 85, 89
mcihylamine plus, 27 Bauer, Hans, 87
suits and hydrogen peroxide freez Baume, 55
ing point, 69 Bavarian Motor Works (BMW) re
Sen also specific compound search, 13-15, 18
Index 199
high-density fuels, 180 Bost, Howard, 37-39, 146, 149, 151,
hybrid rockets, 174 152, 153, 156, 157
Beardell, A. J., 181 Boyd, W. K., 113
Beighley, G. M., 187-188 Brickwedde, 107
Bell Aircraft Company research, 50, British Interplanetary Society, 6
63 Bromine, nature of compounds with
Chariot motor, 111 fluorine, 73, 75
chlorine trifluoride, 74, 76-77 Buffalo Electrochemical Company
Bendix Corporation, 27-28 (BECCO) research
Benzene, use of, 8, 15 hydrogen peroxide, 67-68, 69
Berry, W. E., 113 monopropellants, 131
Beryllium, 127 torpedo propellants, 132
Be-O-H system, 187-188 Bullpup missile, 63
gelled propellants plus, 182, 185- Bureau of Aeronautics, U.S. Navy
186 (BuAer), "Project Zip," 122-123
hydrazines plus, 187 Burket, S., 56
usefulness of, 191 Butanol, nitromethane plus, 23, 136
Butyl mercaptan, 31
Beryllium hydrides, 185-186
Beryllium oxide, 185
Boeing Aircraft, 180 C
Boranes
alkyl derivatives, work on, 123, Cady, George, 173
124 Callery Chemical Company research,
BN system, 125-127, 159-161 50, 56
carboborane discovery, 123-124 borane, 122-123, 125
described, 120-121 monopropellants, 159, 168, 170
future for, 130, 191-192 oxidizers, 82
heat of combustion, 121 Campbell, E. D., 41
hydrazine plus, 159-162 Carboboranes, 123-124
as monopropellants, 152, 159— Carbon, fluoride-type oxidizers and,
162 75-76
Russian work on, 118 Carbon black, interhalogens and,
See also specific compound, e.g., 181
Decaborane; Diborane; Penta- Card-gap test, 76n, 162-163
borane Cavea, 173
Borden, 26 availability of salt, 154, 156-158
Borohydrides, 128-129 Cavea B firing, 158
Boron detonation traps, 164, 165
as additive to gelled fuels, 182 discovery of, 153
nitric acid plus, 152 freezing point, 154
suspensions in hybrid propellants, mercury plus, as fuel for hybrids,
186-187 178-179
Boron carbide, 186-187 synthesis of salt, 154-155, 157
Boron nitride system and boranes, Centaur motor, 108
125-127, 159-161 Chariot motor, 111
Boron trioxide, 123 Chcrcuko.J, P„ 169-170
200 Ignition
Chlorides, hydrogen peroxide and, Crocco, Luigi, 7, 9-10, 18
70 Crossfield, Scott, 104
Chlorine compounds, research with, Cryogenics, defined, 25
78-80, 81; See also specific com C-stuff, 13
pound CTF. See Chlorine trifluoride (ClF;
3
Chlorine pentafluoride. See Com CTF)
pound A Cuddy, Bill, 147-148, 159, 163
Chlorine trifluoride (ClF; CTF), 17, Cyanamide in monopropellants, 172
3
74-78 Cyclooctateraene, WFNA plus, 28
described, 73-74
discovery of, 73
fuels available for, 74, 75-76 D
handling problems and dangers,
73-74, 74-75 Decaborane, 121
hydrazines plus, 76-78 alkyls, research on, 123, 124
hypergolicity of, 73 availability of, 124
as oxidizer for hybrids, 175, 177 effects of ammonia and, 27
propellant gelling with, 181 future for, 191-192
Chromium salts, nitromethane and, hydrazines plus, 159-160
23 Dennison, D. M., 107
Clapp, S. D., 188-189 Dewar, Sir James, 4, 110
Clark, J. D., 52-54, 55, 62, 76, 77- Diamant, 27n
78, 79-80, 85, 89, 95, 103, 147, Diamines, research on, 38-39, 115
161 1, 4-diaza, 1, 4-dimethyl, bicyclo 2, 2,
ClF. See Compound A 2, octane dinitrate. See Cavea
5
Coach, Dean, 179 Diborane
Coates, G. E., 185 availability of, 121, 124
Cohen, Murray, 123 boiling point, 124
Colburn, 81, 84 combustion results, 121-122
Cole, L. G., 27, 55-56 diborane-OF space storable sys
2
Collins, 56 tem, 86
Commercial Solvents Company, 136 future for, 25, 130, 191
Compound A, 87-88 oxidizers and performance of,
hydrazine plus, 100-101 124-125
usefulness of, 191 Dickerson, R. A., 188-189
Compound B, 87, 89 Dickinson, L. A., 109
Compound Delta, 172-173 Diethyl dimethyl ammonium nitrate,
Compound M, 172-173 150, 152
Compound Omega, 89 Diethyl zinc as starting slug, 9, 106
Compound R, 172-173 Diethylcyclohexane, 105
Compound X, 84 Diethylene triamine, hydrazine plus,
Computers, use of, 96, 97, 171-172 45,46
Connaughton, 171 Difluoramine, 82
Corcoran, J. M., 42 Diisopropenyl acetylene, 133
Corporal missile, 23, 27, 30, 41 Diisopropyl amine (Isolde)
Crocco, General G.-A,, 7w detonation, 164
Index 201
performance tests, 149 Engineering Experiment Station,
WFNA plus, 142-144 U.S. Navy (EES), 23, 136
Dimethyldiisopropyl ammonium ni Englebrecht, 80, 81
trate, "quick mix" detonation, Enterprise (ship), 91
165-166 ERDE. See Explosives Research and
Dimethyldivinylacetylene, 37 Development Establishment,
Dimethyl hydrazine, unsymmetrical Waltham Abbey, England
(UDMH), 43-45, 195 (ERDE) research
liquid oxygen plus, 106 Ergols, research on, 13, 16
methylated nitrate, use of, 156 Esnault-Pelterie, Robert, 6, 8, 17
military specifications for, 44 Esso Research and Development
production competition, 44-45 work, 167, 169
RFNA plus, 191 Ethane, 191
Russian use of, 116, 118, 119 Ethanol, use of, 9, 103, 186
Dimethyl mercury for hybrids, 177- Ethers. See specific compound
178 Ethyl silicate, heat flux and, 106
Dinitrogentetraftuoride Ethyl trimethyl ammonium nitrate,
boiling point, 82 150, 152
handling and characteristics, 83 Ethylene diamines, 115
potential uses, 83-84 Ethylene dihydrazine, 45-46
synthesis, 81-82 Ethylene oxide, 28, 133
theoretical performance, 82-83 Experiment Incorporated, 133
Dipropargyl, 30 "Exploration of Space with Reactive
"Dithekites," 134-135, 137 Devices" (Tsiolkovsky), 3-4
Dow Chemical Company research, Explosives Research and Develop
45, 167, 168-169, 172-173 ment Establishment, Waltham
Doyle, Bill, 110 Abbey, England (ERDE) re
Drop weight test, 163 search
Dunn, Louis, 133 hydrogen peroxide, 69
Dunning, 52 monopropellants, 134-135
Du Pont Chemical Company re propyl nitrate, 132
search, 56, 82, 171-172
Dwiggins, 42
Dwyer, R. F., 108 F
Dyer, G. M., 69
Faraday, Michael, 4
Farben (I.G.) research, 15, 16, 115
Ferric oxide as hydrogen fuel cata
E lyst, 108
Firth, 172
Edwards Air Force Base (EAFB), re "Florox," 88-89
search at, 125, 126, 127, 128, Flow ratio of oxidizer to fuel (O/F), 5,
129 195
Elveram, G. W., 59 Flox
Electrical conductivity reactions, use defined, 193
of, 52-54, 84-85 performance, 111-112
202 Ignition
Flox (cont.) freezing point, 60; nitric oxide and,
in RP motor, 111-112 55-57
Fluorides, NF monopropellant stability, 195
studies, 167-173; See also spe See also Red fuming nitric acid
cific compound (RFNA); White fuming nitric
Fluorine acid (WFNA)
boranes and, 122 Furans, 30
gelling compounds, 181 Furfural, RFNA plus, 28
H-Li-F system, 111, 188-189, 191 Furfuryl alcohol, 15, 22
isolation of, 4 aniline plus, 22
liquid, 4; development of motors fuming nitric acids and, 26-27, 28
for, 108-112; early work on,
109-110; handling, 110-111;
for long-range ballistic missiles, G
25; performance with additives,
110 Gall, John, 79-80, 150, 153, 154
liquid oxygen plus liquid. See Flox Gardner, Dave, 166
nature of compounds, 72-73 Gases, history of liquification of, 4, 5
ozone plus, 114 Gaskins, Fred, 181
pentaborane plus, 124 Gasoline
performance and, 99, 100, 111 additives, 27; liquid oxygen, 21;
See also specific compound propellant efficiency and, 22;
Fluorine nitrate, 72 RFNA, 20; Russian studies, 115-
Fluorine perchlorate, 72-73 116
Fluorosulfonic acid, WFNA freezing history of use, 7, 8, 15
point and, 51 for long-range ballistic missiles, 25
Forbes, Forrest ("Woody"), 88 Gaynor, A. J., 114
Forman, 19, 22 General Chemical Company, 59, 60
Forrestal Laboratories, Princeton General Electric Company (GE) re
University, research by, 112, search, 106
113, 133, 146n-147n boranes, 121
Foster, 27 hybrid propellants, 174-175
Fox, Homer, 37-39 hydrogen peroxide, 68
Fox, W. B., 84, 85 monopropellants, 164
Fox, 149 motor testing, 144, 149
Frank, 57, 58, 172 Project Hermes, 121, 174-175
Fredericks, F., 40 X-430 motor, 111
Frozen equilibrium calculation of ex German ballistic missile (A-4)
haust velocity, 93, 95, 97 design and development, 12
Fuels limitations, 13-14
code names for, 14 precursors, 9
fuel to oxidizer ratio, 5, 195 propellants, 103, 131; range and,
See also specific chemical and/or 17
fuel Glassman, Irving, 146«
Fuming nitric acid (SFNA) Globus, R. H., 181
development of, 59 Glocking, I., 185
Index 203
Glushko, V. P., 7, 8 Hough, 159
Goddard, Robert H., 5, In, 20-21 Hughes, Ronald, 52, 123ra
Goering, Hermann, 13 Hughes Tool Company research,
Gordon, Jack, 39, 59, 76 144, 151-152, 164
Gould, Jack, 122, 148, 168, 169 Hybalines, 129
Graefe, A. F., 152 Hybrid propellants, 174-189
Grant, 134 "arcogels" for, 177
Greenfield, S. P., 64 basic mechanism of combustion,
Greenwood, R. W., 50, 60-61 176-177
Grelecki, 186 combustion problems, 184-185,
Griffin, Don, 30, 163 186
Grosse, 37 dimethyl mercury as, 177-178
Guggenheim Aeronautical Labora fuel-oxidizer recommendations,
tory, California Institute of 175-177
Technology (GALCIT) research, heterogenous monopropellants,
10-11, 19-20 186-189
Gunderloy, F. C, 129, 186 high-density system, 116-117,
Gushko, 8 177-178. 179ff
Li-F-H system, 111, 188-189,
191
H metals and high-density fuels, 177-
180
Haberman, 126 origin of concept, 174
Haley, Andrew, 22 storage problems, 183-184, 186
"Halox," 88-89 thixotropic propellants, 180-186;
Happell, 36 See also Thixotropic propellants
"Hard start," defined, 14 tripropellant systems, 187
Harris, 55 UTC power plan and, 177
Harshaw Chemical Company, 73 Hydrazine(s), 40-46
Hashman, Sam, 89 advantages of, 39
Hawkins, A. W., 171-172 aluminum and, 183-184
Hawthorne, H. F., 159, 160 beryllium hydride and, 185
Heller, 16 boranes and, 159-162
Hemesath, Hermann, 15, 16 chlorine pentafluoride plus, 100-
Herrickes, Joe, 162-163 101
Heterogenous propellants, 18, 186— chlorine trifiuoride plus, 74, 75,
189 76-78
HiU, 40 decomposition reactions, 133-134,
Hiller, 107 183-184
Hirschfielder, J. O., 20 development of, 64
Hogsett, J. N., 128-129 dimethyl. See Dimethyl hydrazine,
Holtel, 95 unsymmetrical (UDMH)
Holtzmann, Dick, 88, 123n, 127, 185, freezing point, 39-40, 129, 135
186 gelled, 181, 182-184
Hornstein, Bernard, 64 hydrazine hydrate conversion to,
Horvitz, Dave, 26, 40, 41, 43, 180 26
204 Ignition
Hydrazine(s) (cont.) 111, 191; for long-range ballistic
hydrazine nitrate and, 41-42, 45, missiles, 25; motors for, 108-
135, 135n-136w 109; oxygen plus, 191; produc
hydrogen peroxide and, 68 tion of, 106-107; two forms of
liquid fluorine and, 110, 111 molecule, 107-108
liquid oxygen and, 106 slurried ("slush"), described, 108
metals with, 187 Hydrogen fluoride
monomethyl. See Monomethyl hy estimation methods, 62
drazine (MMH) inhibition of corrosion by, 60-61,
as monopropellants, 133-134, 135, 65
135ra-136w, 159-162 specifications for in fuming nitric
pentaborane and, 126, 127-128 acid, 62
perhydrodecaborate ion and, 160- WFNA and, 62-63
162 Hydrogen peroxide, 12, 13, 16, 18,
problems with, 26, 39-40; restart, 66-71
134 ammonium nitrate plus, 69
Russian use of, 116, 117-119 as auxiliary power source, 70, 123
storability of, 26 boranes and, 122
types of mixed fuels available, 45- corrosiveness of, 70
46 decomposition with heat evolution,
usefulness of, 191 66-67, 71
for X-15, 103 early studies, 10, 12, 13, 131
Hydrazine hydrate, 13, 26 freezing point, 25, 66, 68-69
Hydrazine nitrate in hybrid rockets, 174-175
chlorine trifluoride plus, 76-77 as jet propellant, 69, 70-71
as hydrazine additive, 41-42, 45, as monopropellant, 10, 131-132,
135, 135n-136rc 134
metals with, 187 pentaborane plus, 124
Hydrazine perchlorate, 42, 77-78 problem of system ignition, 69
Hydrazinium borohydride, 128 propyl nitrate plus, 134
Hydrazoid N, 45, 76-77 Russian work with, 116
Hydrazoid P, 77-78 stabilizers, 67-68
Hydrocarbons as torpedo propellant, 132
oxygen plus, performance and, usefulness of, 192
99-100 Hydrogen trifluoride, 74-75
in space storable systems, 86 Hydyne, 45, 106
See also specific compound Hypergolicity, 9, 16, 17
Hydrocyanic acid, hydrazine plus, 41 defined, 14
Hydrogen experiments with, 9, 15, 24-46
classification as energy conductor, speed for, 14
99 See also under specific compound
liquid, 106, 107, 108; acetylene
plus, 147; Be-O-H system, 187-
I
188; boiling point, 107; catalysts
for, 108; handling, 108; history Ignition delay
of, 4, 5; Li-F-Hsystem, 111,188- testing, 28-30
189, 191; liquid fluorine plus, water plus WFNA and, 51-54
Index 205
Illinois Institute of Technology Re oxygen: alcohol plus, 103; am
search Institute (IITRI) monia plus, 104
monopropellant work, 169 space storable systems, 86
ozone research, 112, 113, 114 Johnson, H. L., 107
Imperial Chemical Industries, 167 JP (jet propellant), 33fF
Infrared absorption band for water defined, 194
determination in WFNA, 52 JP-I, 32-33
Ingold, C. K., 52, 57 JP-2, 33
Intercontinental Ballistic Missile JP-3, 33
(ICBM), 63; See also specific mis JP-4: additives for, 37, 39-46; de
sile scribed, 33; oxygen plus, 104,
Inyokern. See Naval Ordnance Test 106; specifications for, 104-105
Station (NOTS) research JP-5, 33
Iodine compounds and hydrazine JP-6, 33
restarts, 134 specifications for, 32-33, 104-105
IRFNA. See Red fuming nitric acid See also specific compound
(RFNA), inhibited JPL. See Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Iridium, hydrazine restarts and, 134 California Institute of Tech
Iron compounds as catalysts, 16 nology (JPL) research
Isolde. See Diisopropyl amine (Isolde) Juno-1, 106
Isopropanol, liquid oxygen plus, 103 Jupiter, 104, 105, 106
J
K
J-2, 108, 191
Jackson, 126 Kapitza, Peter, 117
Jet assisted take-off (JATO) Kaplan, 26
defined, 11, 194 Kay, 59
first use, 20 Kellogg (M. W.) Company research,
importance, 13 25, 27, 68
production, 19 Kennedy, 81, 84
project origin, 11 Kerosene
propellants for, 19-21, 23, 25 derivatives and additives for jets,
Jet propellant. See JP (jet propellant) 32-33
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California history of use, 8
Institute of Technology (JPL) for long-range ballistic missiles, 25
research, 19, 20, 23, 25, 26-27, Russian use, 117, 118
28, 54n, 55-56, 56-57, 59-60 Kilner, Scott, 100
analysis of RFNA, 47-48 King, Spencer, 152, 160
boranes, 121, 125 Kinetic programs in exhaust velocity
halogen fluoride, 73 calculation, 97
hydrogen peroxide, 68
ignition delay, 30, 40
JATO, 21, 22-23 ' L
liquid fluorine, 109-110
monopropellants, 133, 134, 135, Lambda, defined, 194
136, 163, 164 Lance missile, 63
206 Ignition
Lang, Fritz, 6 ozone and, 112—114
LAR missile, 41 RP-I and, 105
Lark motor, 27 use of, 103, 118, 191; as A-4 oxi
L'Astronatique (Esnault-Pelterie), 6 dizer, 13; for nitromethane
Laurie, 137 starts, 136; for long-range bal
Lawrence, Lovell, 21 listic missiles, 25
Lawless, Ed, 123« See also Flox
Lawton, Emil, 84, 87, 88, 89 Lunar landers, 191
Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory Lutz, Otto, 13
NACA (LFPL) research, 50, 56
Ley, Willy, 8, 9
d-Limonene, WFNA and, 28 M
Linde, 4
Liquid gun propellants, 135ra-136rc M-I motor, 108n
Liquid oxygen. See Lox (liquid oxy Maas, 68
gen) McBride, 45
Liquid Rocket Propulsion Laboratory McClellan, 157
(LRPL) research, 162-163, 164, McElroy, 159
165, 166, 194 McGonnigle, T. J., 56, 146, 150«
Liquid strand burner, defined, 137« McGregor, Don, 88
Liquification of gases, history of, 4, 5 Machinist, Roger, 138, 142
"Lithergols," 18-19 Mackenzie, J. S., 84
Lithium: Li-F-H system, 111, 188- McKinney, Dana, 181, 188
189, 191 McNamara, Patrick, 128
Lithium borohydride, hydrazine Madoff, 105
plus, 40-41, 128 MAF-3, 45
Lithium hydride grains for hybrids, Makepeace, G. R., 56, 69
175, 177 Malina, Frank, 10-11, 19-20, 22
Lommon, 25 Manhattan Project, 73
Long-range ballistic missiles, 25; See Marancic, W. G., 113
also specific missile Marsel, 36
Love, 126 Martin, 137
Lox (liquid oxygen), 103, 106 Mason, Dave, 54«, 59, 62
alcohols and, 24, 117 Massachusetts Institute of Technol
ammonia and, 104 ogy (MIT), 68, 69
Be-O-H system, 187-188 Maya, Walter, 84, 87
boiling point, 113 Mead, Al, 163
boranes and, 121, 122 Mercaptans, 31-32, 34, 35, 115; See
history of, 4, 5, 7, 8-9 also specific compound
hydrazines and, 106 Mercury in high-density fuels, 177-
gasoline and, for JATO, 21 179
JP plus, 104 Messerschmitt interceptors, 13
liquid hydrogen and, 102, 107— Metallectro Company research, 40,
108, ldl 41, 42-43, 44
liquid methane and, 146 Methane
motor starting slugs, 106 liquid oxygen plus liquid, 146
Index 207
OF plus as space storable system, burning rate determination, 137«
2
86 detonation propagation and test
usefulness of, 8, 191 ing, 164-165
Methane sulfonic acid, WFNA and, future of, 191
51, 55 for guns, 135re-136ra
Methanol heterogenous, 186-189
as A-4 fuel, 12, 13 instability of, 162
hydrazine plus, 40 low- vs. high-energy, 131
methyl nitrate plus, 134 "quick mix" detonation concept,
nitric acids and, 13-14 165-166
nitrogen tetroxide and, 11 for ram rockets, 35-36
oxygen plus, 24, 103 Russian work on, 117
Methyl acetylenes, 3, 133 test methods, 162-164
Methyl nitrate plus methanol, 134 wartime experiments with, 18, 23
Methylal plus liquid oxygen, 103 See also specific compound
Methylamine, 136 Moody, H. R., 19
ammonia plus, 27, 104 MS-10, 16
aniline-hydrazine system plus, 41 Mueller, Heinz, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18
oxygen-ammonia system plus, 104 Mullaney, 106
Meyers, 172 "Myrol," 18
MHF, 45, 77
Midwest Research Institute, 144, 186
Miller, R. O., 50, 59 N
Minnesota Manufacturing and Min
ing, 167, 172, 173 NAA. See North American Aviation
MMH. See Monomethyl hydrazine (NAA) research
(MMH) Nagai, C. K., 188-189
Mobley, Sparge, 154, 158, 161 NALAR, 64-65
Mock, Jean, 87, 88 NARTS. See Naval Air Rocket Test
Mohr, 40 Station (NARTS) research
Moisson, 4 "NARTS Method of Performance
Mollier charts in exhaust velocity Calculation," 95
calculation, 94 National Advisory Council on Aero
Monergals. See Monopropellant(s) nautics (NACA), 74, 194
and specific compound National Aeronautical And Space
Monoethylaniline, 23 Administration (NASA), 86,
"Monex," 187 122, 125
Monomethyl hydrazine (MMH) Naval Air Rocket Test Station
chlorine trifluoride and, 76-77 (NARTS) research, 28, 31, 40,
decaborane and, 159 42, 43, 52-54, 60, 161-162
hydrazine and, 44, 45, 76-77, 158 chlorine trifluoride, 74, 76-78
perchloryl fluoride and, 81 hybrids, 177-179
specifications for, 45 hydrogen peroxide, 69-71
Monopropellant(s), 131-173 hydrogen trifluoride, 77-78
background of, 9-11 hypergolicity and ignition, 28-29
liquid oxygen and alcohol, 103
defined, 9
208 Ignition
Naval Air Rocket Test Station for jets, 33
(NARTS) research (cont.) maximum density, 63
monopropellants, 137-144, 148- methanol plus, 13-14
151, 152, 153-158, 161-162, problems with, 116-117
162-163, 164 specifications for, 117-118
perchloryl fluoride, 79-81 Nitric oxide, 55-57
Naval Ordnance Laboratory (NOL) Nitrites, stability in acids, 58
card-gap test, 162 Nitrobenzene plus tetranitrometh-
propellant research, 42 ane, 147
Naval Ordnance Test Station (NOTS) Nitroethane, WFNA plus, 137
research, 40, 41, 45, 56, 89 Nitrogen
hybrids, 176, 179, 182-183 fluorine compounds, 72, 169-173;
hydrogen peroxide, 68-69 oxidetrifluoride, 84-86; trifluo-
monopropellants, 135 ride, 8 In, 82w, 83
Naval Underwater Ordnance Station mixed oxides, 56-57
(NUOS), 195 Nitrogen oxidetrifluoride (nitrosyl
Neff.J., 151-152 trifluoride; trifluoroamine ox
"Neofuel," 136-137 ide), 84-86
New York University (NYU), 34, 36- Nitrogen tetroxide, 7, 11
37, 115 freezing point, 25
Niederhauser, W. D., 83, 167-168 -nitric acid system, 56
Nike Ajax missile, 44 Nitrogen trifluoride
Nitrate salts boiling point, 82n
of amines: monopropellant re chemistry, 83
search with, 137-144, 144-145, nitrogen oxidetrifluoride, 84-86
147, 148-151, 153-158; struc synthesis, 8 In
ture sensitivity relations, 15Ow Nitroglycerine, 10
of boron, 152 Nitromethane, 10
methyl amine plus, 136 as monopropellant, 23, 136-137
of methylated UDMH, 156 WFNA freezing point and, 50
Nitric acid(s), 16-17, 27 Nitrosyl sulfuric acid, WFNA and,
additive acid determinations, 55 51
amine nitrate plus, 137-144, 144- Nitrous oxide
145, 147, 148-151, 153-158 advantages and disadvantages, 49
boron plus, 152 as freezing point depressant, 56
classification of behavior of, 57-59 as monopropellant, 18-19
code names for, 14 Nitryl fluoride, 86
corrosion inhibitors, 116 Noeggerath, Wolfgang C, 13, 14, 15,
decomposition reaction, 58-59 16, 17, 116
freezing point, 25 NOL. See Naval Ordnance Labora
fuming. See Fuming nitric acid tory (NOL)
(SFNA); Red fuming nitric acid Nomad motor, 111
(RFNA); White fuming nitric Noordung, Hermann (Captain Po-
acid (WFNA) tocnik), 8
gelling, 181 North American Aviation (NAA) re
hypcrgolic reactions, SO search, 25, 40, 41, 51, 56
Index 209
chlorine trifluoride, 74 fluorine plus, 114
liquid fluorine motor, 110 oxygen plus, 112-114, 118-119
Lox-alcohol system, 103 problems with, 112-114
NALAR, 64-65
NOTS. See Naval Ordnance Test Sta
tion (NOTS) research
"Notsgel," 182-183 P
Nuclear rockets, 109, 191
Nyberg, D. G., 179 Pasons, John W., 10, 11, 19, 22, 121
Paulet, Pedro A., In
Pennsalt research, 8, 9
O monopropellants, 144, 153, 166-
167
Oberth, Herman, 5-6, 7, 18, 174 perchloryl fluoride, 80-81
O/F, 5, 195 Pentaborane, 26
Office of Naval Research (ONR), 110 alkyls, 123, 124
Oja, Phyllis, 150 availability of, 124, 125
Olefins, NF and, 168 combustion results, 122
Olin Mathieson Company, 79 future for, 130, 191-192
borane research, 122-123 hydrazines plus, 126, 127-128
drop weight tester, 163 for long-range ballistic missiles,
Olszewski, K. S., 4 25
"Optolin," 16 performance, 124, 126-128
Orthotoluide, 22 problems with, 126-127
Ordian, 122 Perchloric acid, 50, 79
Ordin, 111, 122 Perchloryl fluoride
Oxidizers discovery, 80
missile type and, 63 mixtures as monopropellant, 146
O/F ratio, 5, 195 performance and, 101
research in storable, 19-20 research on, 79-81, 119
See also Hybrid propellants; Mono- synthesis of, 80-81
propellant(s); and specific com usefulness of, 191
pound Perhydrodecaborate ion plus hy
Oxygen drazine, 160-161
equilibrium pressure and WFNA, Performance, 90-102
59 absolute limits of, 190
history of use, 8 calculation: BN method, 96; com
liquid. See Lox (liquid oxygen) puters and, 96, 97, 171-172;
liquid fluorine plus liquid. See Flox exhaust velocity, 91-94; graphic
motor heat generation and, 105- methods, 95-96; hand methods,
106 91-94; kinetic programs in, 97;
Mollier charts, 94; NQD method,
performance and, 99-100, 101,
95-96; specific impulse, 171-
105
172,
Oxygen fluorides, 72, 73, 86
defined, 90-91
Ozone, 9
nuclear rockets and, 190-191
described, 112
210 Ignition
Performance (cont.) R
propellant combination choice for,
98-102, 191-192 Ram rockets, 35-36
propellant density related to range, described, 35
116n-117ra ethylene oxide fuel, 133
specific impulse: calculation, 171- jelled fuel for, 182
172; reporting, 97-98 pentaborane-hydrazine system for,
thrust vs. power as measure of, 127-128
90-91 Rand Corporation, 25
See also specific compound Range, Grete, 17
Peroxide. See Hydrogen peroxide Rapp, Lou, 30-31, 35, 104, 160, 161
PF. See Perchloryl fluoride Rau, Eric, 60
Phillips Petroleum Company re Reaction Motors, Inc. (RMI) re
search, 115 search, 25, 27, 28, 37, 40, 41,
jet propellants, 34, 37-39 43n, 195
monopropellants, 144, 146, 149, boranes, 121, 123-124, 125, 126
151 borohydrides, 128
Phoebus motors, 109 chlorine trifluoride, 76, 77
Phosphates, hydrogen peroxide and, heat flux, 106
67 hybrid propellants, 176, 180, 182,
Phosphorus derivatives as jet propel 186-187
lants, 34-35 hydrazines, 128
Pilipovich, Donald, 84 hydrogen peroxide, 131-132
Pisani, Joe, 144-145, 147 ignition delay, 30
Platz, G. M., 113 JATO, 21
Polyacetylenics. See specific com liquid oxygen, 103, 106
pound monopropellants, 131-132, 144,
Polyamines, 38; See also specific com 145-146, 164, 167, 168
pound space storable systems, 86
Polyethylene, RFNA plus, 186 X-15, 104
Pomerantz, Phil, 177, 178, 179 Red fuming nitric acid (RFNA), 19-
Polassium cuprocyanate as catalyst, 20
13 additive experiments, 26, 27-28
Polassium nitrate, WFNA and, 50 amines and, 39
Power, as rocketry concept, 90-91 ammonia and, 27
Propane, 191 aniline and, 20, 21, 26
Propellants. See Hybrid propellants; boron carbide and, 186
Monopropellant(s); and specific changes in, on holding, 47-48
compound corrosive quality, 46
Propyl nitrate, 132-133, 134 dangers of, 48
Propyne, 37 decompression pressure control,
Pyridinium nilrate, WFNA plus, 137, 59
138-139, 140-141 defined, 8, 61-62
I'yt'imidincs as additives, 28; See also disadvantages, 47-48
specific compound freezing point control, 59, 61
Index 211
furfuryl alcohol and, 27 Rohm and Haas research
improvements in handling, 57 hybrid propellants, 175-176
inhibited: rocket grades, 118; Rus monopropellants, 159-160, 167-
sian use, 117, 118 168
introduction of, 8 oxidizers, 82, 83
JATO and, 20, 21 Rosenberg, 128, 185
military specifications for, 61-62 Rowe, 122
mixed acid as alternative to, 48-49 RP-I, 33
MMH-perchloryl fluoride system Lox motor: liquid fluorine and,
and, 81 111-112; performance, 105;
polyethylene suspended in, 186 use of, 106*
research on composition of, 21 specifications for, 105
sample holder in loss prevention, usefulness of, 105, 106, 191
55 Ruff, Otto, 73
titanium and, 61 Russian research, 115-119
UDMH and, 191
water content determination, 54ra
Redstone missile, 103 S
Reinhardt, Tom, 76, 79, 95
RFNA. See Red fuming nitric acid SA-2 (Guideline) missile, 116
(RFNA) Sage, B. H., 56
Rice, Tom, 137, 138 Sander, Friedrich Wilhelm, 8
Riedel, Klaus, 8-9 Sanger, Eugen, 9, 11, 14, 17, 18, 106,
Rittenhouse, J. B., 61 112
RMI. See Reaction Motors, Inc. (RMI) Samarium oxide, 131
research Satterfield, 95
Rocketdyne research, 84, 85, 87-89 Saturn V, 91, 105, 191
Compound A, 87-88 Schamacher, 8 Iw
boranes, 127 Schechter, W. H., 50, 56
diethylcyclohexane, 105 Scheer, Milton, 29, 60
"Florox," 88-89 Schirmer, 57, 58
hybrid propellants, 182, 185, 186, Schlesinger, H. I., 120
187, 188-189 Schmitz, 8 Ira
linear polymer beryllium, 129 Schultz, H. W„ 128-129
liquid fluorine, 111-112 Semishin, V. I., 40
monopropellants, 164, 167 SFNA. See Fuming nitric acid
Nomad motor, 111 (SFNA); Red fuming nitric acid
solid propellants, 87 (RFNA); White fuming nitric
space storable systems, 86 acid (WFNA)
Roberts, 55 Sheehan, Dave, 87
Rocker, W. W., 56 Shell Development Company, 34, 36,
Rocket (The) into Planetary Space 134
(Oberth), 5-6 Shesta, John, 21
Rocket Research Company, 187 Shifting equilibrium calculation of
Rocket-on-rotor (ROR), 131-182,195 exhaust velocity, 94, 97
212 Ignition
Short-range missile propellants, 191 Streim, Howard, 29
Sidgwick, 147 Sulfides, organic, 115
Silanes, 30 Sulfonic acids, WFNA and, 51
Silica in propellant gelling, 181 Sulfuric acids, nitric acids and, 48-
Silicone as fuel additive, 106 49, 116
Silverman, 105 Summerfield, 22
Skolnik, 56 Summers, R. W„ 171-172
Smith, Ivan, 123n Super-P project, 70-71
Smith, Joe, 89 Surface-to-air missiles (SAM), 23,
Sodium borohydride, 128 100, 116
Sodium nitrite, WFNA and, 50-51 Surface-to-surface missiles, 23
Sodium perchlorate monohydrate, Syracuse University, 40, 42
42 Szoke, John, 145
Sodium seleride, 16
Solomon, I. J., 169
Solomon, W. C, 173 T
Southern Research Institute, 52
Space storable propellants, 57, 63, Tactical missiles, 63, 191
82, 83-86, 191 "Taifun" missile, 15
Space travel Tait, Charles, 147-148, 157-158
motors for, 63, 85-86 Tannenbaum, Stan, 76, 77, 128, 145,
propellants for, 63, 191; dinitro- 146
gentetrafluoride, 83-84; MON- Target drone, 177
10, 57 Tarpley, Bill, 181, 188
Specific impulse of propulsion, 97- Taylor, A. G., 113
98, 171-172 Terlizzi, Paul, 28, 29, 137
Sprague, 56 Tertiary amines, 38-39
Sputnik I, 83 Tetraalkyl ethylene diamines, 115
SS-missiles, 117-118 Tetraallyl silane, 30
Standard Oil of California research, "Tetrakis," 172-173
30-32,45, 50-51, 115, 116 Tetramethyl tetrazine, 45
Standard Oil of Indiana research, Tetranitromethane (TNM)
34-35, 50 advantages and disadvantages, 16-
Stanford Research Institute, 109 17
Stannates, hydrogen peroxide and, early use, 8
67-68 as monopropellant, 147-148
Slauflfcr Chemical Company re Thackery, J. D., 136
search, 82, 148, 168, 169 Thermal efficiency of rockets, 9
Still', 20 Thermal stability tester, 163
Stock, Alfred, 120 Thiophosphates for jets, 34-35
Storable propellants Thixotropic propellants, 180-186
need for, 12-13 fire hazards and, 18On
research on, 25-26 heterogenous, 186-189
Cor space travel, 57, 63, 83, 83-86, leakage hazards and, 180
191 metallized, 182-183; problems
Strategic missiles, 69 with, 183-186
Index 213
production of, 181, as propellant, 22, 27
propellant sloshing and, 181 spontaneous ignition of, 14
restart inability, 185
shelf life of metallized, 183
storage problems, 183-186 U
Thomas, D. D., 40
Thompson, R. J., 26, 27 U-DETA, 45
Thompson, T. L., 44, 56, 61 UDMH. See Dimethyl hydrazine, un-
Thompson Ramo-Wooldridge Cor symmetrical (UDMH)
poration (TRW), 86 UFA
Thor Able rocket, 62n defined, 195
Thor rocket, 104, 105 for hybrids, 174
Titan I ICBM, 105 Union Carbide Company research,
Titan II ICBM 108, 129
development, 56 United Technology Corporation
propellant, 45, 63, 105, 191 (UTC) research, 175, 176-177,
Titanium, RFNA and, 61 195
Toluene, 8 University of Texas, 30
Toluidine, 15 Urey, H., 107
Tonka
composition of, 14, 15
defined, 195 V
importance of, 24
Russian use of, 116 V-2. See German ballistic missile (A-4)
Torpedo propellants, 116, 132, 133 Vandercook, N., 84
Tox, 151 Vanguard rocket, 62n, 106
"Tribrid," 187 Verein fur Raumschiffart (VFR), 6,
Triethyl aluminum for motor starts, 7-9, 195
106 Viking rocket, 103
Trie thy lamine, 15 Vinyl ethers, 16, 115; See also Visol(s)
Triethylenediamine, diamine oxide Visol(s)
plus nitric acid, 158-159 composition and properties, 16,
"Triflox," 89 195
Trimethylammonium nitrate, 138, German research in, 16
141, 149-150, 151, 152 importance of, 24
2, 4, 6,-Trinitrophenol, WFNA and, Russian research m, 115
50 Von Braun, Wernher, 9, 12, 24, 131
Truax, Robert C, 20, 23, 103-104 Von Karman, Theodore, 10, 19, 22
Tsander, F. A., 6-7, 9, 18 Von Zborowski, Helmut Philip, 13-
Tsien, Hus Shen, 10 14, 15
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin Eduardo-
vitch, 3, 5, In, 106
Tuffly, Bartholomew, 84 W
Tunkel, Steve, 176
Turpentine WAC Corporal, 27
hypergolicity of, 22 Wuhrmke, 18
214 Ignition
Walker, 42 Whittaker, A. G., 56, 137ra
Walsh, Mike, 153, 164 Williams, 95
Walter, Helmuth, 10, 12, 13 Wilson, Dick, 88, 128
Walter Type fuels, 12, 13, 16 Winkler, Johannes, 8, 86
Wasserfall SAM, 16 Winternitz, Paul, 103, 104, 106, 121
Water Wiseman, 69
hydrazine freezing point and, 40 Wisniewski, L. V., 69
in RFNA, method of determina Wittorf, 55
tion, 54ra Woman (The) on the Moon (film by
in WFNA: ignition delay and, 51- Lang), 6
54; measurement of, 52-54 Wright Air Development Center
Westvaco Clor-Alkali (FMC), 44-45 (WADC), 195
Wharton, Walt, 170, 171, 173 Wroblewski, Z. F., 4, 5
White, E. I., 113 Wyandotte Chemical Company
White, L., 54 monopropellant research, 132,
White fuming nitric acid (WFNA), 133, 144, 147-148, 157-158,
22, 26-28, 195 158-159, 163, 164
ammonia and, 27 WyId, James, 21
corrosiveness of, 60-61
diisopropylamine and, 142-144
X
disadvantages of, 49, 60-61, 116
equilibrium oxygen pressure and,
X-I supersonic plane, 103
59
X-15 supersonic plane, 103-104
freezing point, 49; depression of,
X-430 motor, 111
50-51, 61
Xylidines, 15, 22; See also Tonka
furfuryl alcohol and, 26-27
hydrazine and, 29
ignition delay, 51-54
Y
manufacture of anhydrous, 54
methane sulfonic acid and, 55
Yates, R. E., 152
military specifications for, 61-62
Young, 128
nitro-alkyls and, 137
pyridinium nitrate and, 137, 138-
139, 140-141
sulfuric acid and, as alternative to
RFNA, 48-49 Zborowski, 22
trimethylammonium nitrate and, Zinc alkyls, 30
138, 141, 149-150 Zletz, A., 50
water in: ignition delay and, 51- Zollinger, 172
54; measurement of, 52-54 Zwicky, Fritz, 136
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
John D. Clark joined the Naval Air Rocket Test Station at Dover,
NJ., in 1949. (It became the Liquid Rocket Propulsion Laboratory
of Picatinny Arsenal in 1960.) He retired in 1970, after having been
in charge of liquid propellant development for most of the twenty-one
years.
A native of Alaska, Dr. Clark attended the University of Alaska and
received the B.S. from the California Institute of Technology, the
M.S. from the University of Wisconsin, and, in 1934, the Ph.D. from
Stanford University. He worked as a chemist in several industries
prior to his association with NARTS.
A great deal of Dr. Clark's writing has been in the form of govern
ment reports which are classified, but he has also contributed sci
entific articles and papers in the open literature and, as an avocation,
written stories and articles for science fiction magazines.
Engraving on plastic by lnga Pratt Clark, presented to Bob
Engineering Officer, NARTS, by the Propellant Division, 1959